Arrest | 21

Toward morning they awoke, yawned, grunted, pulled up
their legs, moved into various corners, and our acquaintance
began.

"What are you in for?"

But a troubled little breeze of caution had already breathed on
me beneath the poisoned roof of SMERSH and I pretended to
be surprised:

"No idea. Do the bastards tell you?"

However, my cellmates—tankmen in soft black helmets—hid
nothing. They were three honest, openhearted soldiers—people
of a kind I had become attached to during the war years because
I myself was more complex and worse. All three had been
officers. Their shoulder boards also had been viciously torn off,
and in some places the cotton batting stuck out. On their stained
field shirts light patches indicated where decorations had been
removed, and there were dark and red scars on their faces and
arms, the results of wounds and burns. Their tank unit had, un—
fortunately, arrived for repairs in the village where the SMERSH
counterintelligence headquarters of the Forty—eighth Army was
located. Still damp from the battle of the day before, yesterday
they had gotten drunk, and on the outskirts of the village broke
into a bath where they had noticed two raunchy broads going to
bathe. The girls, half—dressed, managed to get away all right
from the soldiers‘ staggering, drunken legs. But one of them, it
turned out, was the property of the army Chief of Counterintelli—
gence, no less.

Yes! For three weeks the war had been going on m51de Ger—
many, and all of us knew very well that if the girls were German
they could be raped and then shot. This was almost a combat
distinction. Had they been Polish girls or our own displaced
Russian girls, they could have been chased naked around the
garden and slapped on the behind—an amusement, no more.
But just because this one was the "campaign wife" of the Chief
of Counterintelligence, right off some deep—in—the—rear sergeant
had viciously torn from three front—line officers the shoulder
boards awarded them by the front headquarters and had taken
off the decorations conferred upon them by the Presidium of the
Supreme Soviet. And now these warriors, who had gone through
the whole war and who had no doubt crushed more than one
