The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 81

equipment; and to those everywhere who, in 1942, were guilty of
the slanderous rumor that people were dying of starvation in
blockaded Leningrad.

' During that same year, after the disasters at Kerch (120,000
prisoners), at Kharkov (even more), and in the course of the
big southern retreat to the Caucasus and the Volga, another very
important wave of officers and soldiers was pumped through—
those who refused to stand to the death and who retreated without
permission, the men whom, in the words of Stalin‘s immortal
Order No. 227, the Motherland could not forgive for the shame
they had caused her. This wave, however, never reached Gulag:
after accelerated processing by divisional tribunals, it was, to a
man, herded into punishment battalions, and was soaked up in
the red sand of advanced positions, leaving not a trace. Thus was
cemented the foundation of the Stalingrad victory, but it has
found no place in the usual Russian history and exists only in the
private history of the sewage system.

(Incidentally, we are here trying to identify only those waves
which came into Gulag from outside. There was, after all,
an incessant internal recirculation from reservoir to reservoir,
through the system of so—called sentencing in camp, which was
particularly rampant during the war years. But we are not con—
sidering those in this chapter.)

Conscientiousness requires that we recall also the reverse waves
of wartime: the previously mentioned Czechs and Poles who
were released; as well as criminals released for service at the front.

From 1943 on, when the war turned in our favor, there began
the multimillion wave from the occupied territories and from
Europe, which got larger every year up to 1946. Its two main
divisions were:

e Civilians who had lived under the Germans or among
Germans—hung with a tenner under the letter "a": 58—1a.

e Military personnel who had ‘been POW‘s—who were
nailed with a tenner under the letter "b"; 58—1b.

Everyone living under the occupation wanted, of course, to
survive, and therefore could not remain with hands folded, and
thereby theoretically earned, along with his daily bread, a future
sentence—if not for treason to the Motherland, then at least for
