The Interrogation | 115

the technique of intensified hunger: for example, Chulpenyev
was kept for a month on three and a half ounces of bread, after
which—when he had just been brought in from the pit—the
interrogator Sokol placed in front of him a pot of thick borscht,
and half a loaf of white bread sliced diagonally. (What does it
matter, one might ask, how it was sliced? But Chulpenyev even
today will insist that it was really sliced very attractively.) How—
ever, he was not given a thing to eat. How ancient it all is, how
medieval, how primitive! The only thing new about it was that
it was applied in a socialist society! Others, too, tell about such
tricks. They were often tried. But we are going to cite another
case involving Chebotaryev because it combined so many
methods. They put him in the interrogator‘s office for seventy—
two hours, and the only thing he was allowed was to be taken to
the toilet. For the rest, they allowed him neither food nor drink
—even though there was water in a carafe right next to him. Nor
was he permitted to sleep. Throughout there were three inter—
rogators in the office, working in shifts. One kept writing some—
thing—silently, without disturbing the prisoner. The second
slept on the sofa, and the third walked around the room, and as
soon as Chebotaryev fell asleep, beat him instantly. Then they
switched roles. (Maybe they themselves were being punished
for failure to deliver.) And then, all of a sudden, they brought
Chebotaryev a meal: fat Ukrainian borscht, a chop, fried pota—
toes, and red wine in a crystal carafe. But because Chebotaryev
had had an aversion to alcohol all his life, he refused to drink the
wine, and the interrogator couldn‘t go too far in forcing him to,
because that would have spoiled the whole game. After he had
eaten, they said to him: "Now here‘s what you have tesfified to
in the presence of two witnesses. Sign here." In other words, he
was to sign what had been silently composed by one interrogator
in the presence of another, who had been asleep, and a third,
who had been actively working. On the very first page Che—
botaryev learned he had been on intimate terms with all the
leading Japanese generals and that he had received espionage
assignments from all of them. He began to cross out whole pages.
They beat him up and threw him out. Blaginin, another Chinese
Eastern Railroad man, arrested with him, was put through the
same thing; but he drank the wine and, in a state of pleasant
