368 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

session, which consisted solely of voluntary testimony and an
evaluation of his activity. The official indictment was ready by
August 23. The speed was totally unbelievable, but it had im—
pact. (Someone had estimated the situation quite accurately: to
have forced false and pitiful testimony out of Savinkov by torture
would only have wrecked the authenticity of the picture.)

In the official indictment, couched in already—well—developed
terminology that turned everything upside down, Savinkov was
charged with just about everything imaginable: with being a
"consistent enemy of the poorest peasantry"; with "assisting the
Russian bourgeoisie in carrying out its imperialist ambitions"
(in other words, he was in favor of continuing the war with
Germany); with "maintaining relations with representatives of
the Allied command" (this would have been when he was in
charge of the Ministry of War!); with "becoming a member of
soldiers‘ committees for purposes of provocation" (i.e., he was
elected by the soldiers‘ committees) ; and, last but not least, some—
thing to make even the chickens cackle with laughter—with
having had "monarchist sympathies."

But all that was old hat. There were some new items too—
the standard charges for all future trials: money from the im—
perialists; espionage for Poland (they left out Japan, believe it
or not) ; yes, and he had also wanted to poison the Red Army with
potassium cyanide (but for some reason he did not poison even
one Red Army soldier).

On August 26 the trial began. The presiding judge was Ulrikh
—this being our earliest encounter with him. And there was no
prosecutor at all, nor any defense lawyer.

Savinkov was lackadaisical in defending himself, and he raised
hardly any objection at all to the evidence. He conceived of this
trial in a lyrical sense. It was his last encounter with Russia and
his last opportunity to explain himself in public. And to repent.
(Not of these imputed sins, but of others.)

(And that theme song fitted well here, and greatly confused the
defendant: "After all, we are all Russians together. You and we
adds up to us. You love Russia beyond a doubt, and we respect
your love—and do we not love Russia too? In fact, are we not
at present the fortress and the glory of Russia? And you wanted
to fight against us? Repent!‘")
