412 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

ently during the interrogations, realized what was happening,
turned stubborn, and died silently but at least not shamefully.
For some reason, they did not, after all, put on public trial
Rudzutak, Postyshev, Yenukidze, Chubar, Kosior, and, for that
matter, Krylenko himself, even though their names would have
embellished the trials.

They put on trial the most compliant. A selection was made
after all.

The men selected were drawn from a lower order, but, on the
other hand, the mustached Producer knew each of them very
well. He also knew that on the whole they were weaklings, and
he knew, one by one, the particular weaknesses of each. Therein
lay his dark and special talent, his main psychological bent and
his life‘s achievement: to see people‘s weaknesses on the lowest
plane of being.

And the man who seems, in the perspective of time, to have
embodied the highest and brightest intelligence of all the dis—
graced and executed leaders (and to whom Arthur Koestler ap—
parently dedicated his talented inquiry) was N. I. Bukharin.
Stalin saw through him, too, at that lowest stratum at which the
human being unites with the earth; and Stalin held him in a long
death grip, playing with him as a cat plays with a mouse, letting
him go just a little, and then catching him again. Bukharin wrote
every last word of our entire existing—in other words, nonexist—
ent—Constitution, which is so beautiful to listen to. And he flew
about up there, just below the clouds, and thought that he had
outplayed Koba: that he had thrust a constitution on him that
would compel him to relax the dictatorship. And at that very
moment, he himself had already been caught in those jaws.

Bukharin did not like Kamenev and Zinoviev, and way back
when they had first been tried, after the murder of Kirov, he
had said to people close to him: "Well, so what? That‘s the kind

of people they were; maybe there was something to it. . . ." (That
was the classic formula of the philistine in those years: "There
was probably something to it. . . . In our country they don‘t

arrest people for nothing." And that was said in 1935 by the lead—
ing theoretician of the Party!) He spent the period of the second
trial of Kamenev and Zinoviev, in the summer of 1936, hunting
in the Tien Shan, and knew nothing about it. He came down from
