204 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

cell who was to be entrusted with the responsibility of carrying
out the latrine bucket. (In more isolated, ordinary prisons the
prisoners had enough freedom of speech and self—government to
decide this question themselves. But in the Chief Political Prison
such an important event could not be left to chance.) So then
you formed up in single file, hands behind your backs, and, at
the head of the line, the responsible latrine—bucket—bearer carried
chest high the two—gallon tin pail with a lid on it. When you
reached your goal, you were locked in again, each having first
been handed a small piece of paper, the size of two railway tickets.
(At the Lubyanka this was not particularly interesting. The paper
was blank and white. But there were enticing prisons where they
gave you pages of books—and what reading that was! You could
try to guess whence it came, read it over on both sides, digest the
contents, evaluate the style—and when words had been cut in
half that was particularly essential! You could trade with your
comrades. In some places they handed out pages from the once
progressive Granat Encyclopedia, and sometimes, it‘s awful to
say it, from the classics, and I don‘t mean belles—lettres either.
Visits to the toilet thus became a means of acquiring knowledge.)

But there‘s not that much to laugh at. We are dealing with
that crude necessity which it is considered unsuitable to refer to
in literature (although there, too, it has been said, with immortal
adroitness: "Blessed is he who early in the morning . . ."). This
allegedly natural start of the prison day set a trap for the prisoner
that would grip him all day, a trap for his spirit—which was
what hurt. Given the lack of physical activity in prison, and the
meager food, and the muscular relaxation of sleep, a person was
just not able to square accounts with nature immediately after
rising. Then they quickly returned you to the cell and locked you
up—until 6 P.M., or, in some prisons, until morning. At that
point, you would start to get worried and worked up by the ap—
proach of the daytime interrogation period and the events of the
day itself, and you would be loading yourself up with your bread
ration and water and gruel, but no one was going to let you visit
that glorious accommodation again, easy access to which free
people are incapable of appreciating. This debilitating, banal need
could make itself felt day after day shortly after the morning
toilet trip and would then torment you the whole day long, op—
