The Supreme Measure | 439

years at a stretch: those were the "archives" they kept there. And
before beginning restoration work on these churches, they had to
haul away the bones in them by the truckload.) On the basis of
this calculation, an average of six people were shot in the course
of one day at each execution site. What‘s so fantastic about that?
It is even an understatement! (According to other sources,
1,700,000 had been shot by January 1, 1939.)

During the years of World War II, the use of capital punish—
ment was occasionally extended for various reasons (as, for
example, by the militarization of the railroads), and, at times,
was broadened as to method (from April, 1943, on, for example,
with the decree on hanging).

All these events delayed to a certain extent the promised full,
final, and perpetual repeal of the death penalty. However, the
patience and loyalty of our people finally earned them this re—
ward. In May, 1947, TIosif Vissarionovich inspected his new
starched dickey in his mirror, liked it, and dictated to the Presi—
dium of the Supreme Soviet the Decree on the Abolition of
Capital Punishment in peacetime (replacing it with a new
maximum term of twenty—five years—it was a good pretext for
introducing the so—called quarter).

But our people are ungrateful, criminal, and incapable of ap—
preciating generosity. Therefore, after the rulers had creaked
along and eked out two and a half years without the death
penalty, on January 12, 1950, a new decree was published that
constituted an about—face: "In view of petitions pouring in from
the national republics [the Ukraine?], from the trade unions [oh,
those lovely trade unions; they always know what‘s needed],
from peasant organizations [this was dictated by a sleepwalker:
the Gracious Sovereign had stomped to death all peasant organi—
zations way back in the Year of the Great Turning Point], and
also from cultural leaders [now, that is quite likely]," capital
punishment was restored for a conglomeration of "traitors of the
Motherland, spies, and subversives—diversionists." (And, of
course, they forgot to repeal the quarter, the twenty—five—year
sentence, which remained in force.)

And once this return to our familiar friend, to our beheading
blade, had begun, things went further with no effort at all: in
1954, for premeditated murder; in May, 1961, for theft of state
