120 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

And the idea flashes through your mind—is it a brilliant or
a fatal one?—that you ought to come as close as you can to the
truth of what was actually said—of course rounding off the,
sharp edges and skipping the dangerous parts. After all, people
say that when you lie you should always stay as close to the
truth as possible. And maybe B will guess what‘s up and say
approximately the same thing and then your testimony will
coincide in some respects and they will leave you in peace.

Many years later you will come to understand that this was
not really a wise idea, and that it is much smarter to play the
role of someone so improbably imbecile that he can‘t remember
one single day of his life even at the risk of being beaten. But you
have been kept awake for three days. You have hardly strength
enough to follow the course of your own thoughts and to main—
tain an imperturbable expression. And you don‘t have even a
minute to think things over. Suddenly two interrogators—for
they enjoy visiting one another—are at you;: What were you
talking about? What about? What about?

And you testify: We were talking about collective farms—to
the effect that not everything had as yet been set to rights on
them but it soon would be. We talked about the lowering of
piece rates. . . . And what in particular did you say about them?
That you were delighted they had been reduced? But that wasn‘t
the way people normally talked—it was too implausible. And so
as to make it seem an altogether believable conversation, you
concede that you complained just a little that they were putting
on the squeeze a bit with piece rates.

The interrogator writes down the deposition himself, translat—
ing it into his own language: At this meeting we slandered Party
and government policy in the field of wages.

And someday B is going to accuse you: "Oh, you blabber—
mouth, and I said we were making plans to go fishing."

But you tried to outsmart your interrogator! You have a quick,
abstruse mind. You are an intellectual! And you outsmarted
yourself. . ..

In Crime and Punishment, Porfiri Petrovich makes a surpris—
ingly astute remark to Raskolnikov, to the effect that he could
have been found out only by someone who had himself gone
through that same cat—and—mouse game—implying, so to speak:
"I don‘t even have to construct my own version with you intel—
