The Law as a Child | 301

What comparison is available for purposes of evaluation? In
1907 a group of leftist leaders published a collection of essays
entitled Against Capital Punishment,‘ in which are listed by
name all those sentenced to death in Tsarist Russia from 1826 to
1906. The editors qualify their findings with the statement that
there were some additional victims, whose names remain un—
known, and that the list is incomplete. (However, it is certainly
not so incomplete as Latsis‘ materials compiled during the Civil
War.) The list totals 1,397—from which 233 persons have to be
deducted because their death sentences were commuted, as do an
additional 270, who were sentenced in absentia and never caught
(for the most part Polish rebels who had fled to the West). That
leaves 894, a figure covering eighty years, which is not even close
to Latsis‘ total for only one and a half years, and not including all
the provinces of Russia either. True, the editors of the collection
cite another presumed statistic of 1,310 for those sentenced to
death (although perhaps not executed) in 1906 alone, and a total
of 3,419 for 1826 through 1906. But this, mind you, was right
in the midst of the notorious Stolypin reaction, a period for which
an additional figure is available: 950 executions over a period of
six months.‘ (In fact, the Stolypin military field tribunals were
in existence for six months all told.) It sounds awful, and yet it
does not make much of an impression on our hardened nerves:
even if we multiply by three this figure of 950 for six months, in
order to compare it with the Latsis figure for eighteen months in
the postrevolutionary period, we still come up with the fact that
the terror after the Revolution was at least three times more in—
tense than Stolypin‘s. And that was for just twenty provinces and
excluded courts and tribunals.

And from November, 1917, on, the courts acted on their own.
Despite all the difficulties at the time, Guiding Principles of the
Criminal Law of the R.S.F.S.R. were issued for their use in 1919.
(We have not read this work, could not obtain it, and know only
that it included "imprisonment for an indefinite term"—in other
words, pending a special order.)

The courts were of three kinds: the people‘s courts, the circuit
courts, and the Revolutionary Tribunals—the Revtribunals.

6. M. N. Gernet (editor), Protiv Smertnoi Kazni (Against Capital Punish—
ment), second edition, 1907, pp. 385—423.
7. The journal Byloye, No. 2/14, February, 1907.
