16 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

a streetlamp and began to scream, refusing to submit. A crowd
gathered. (There had to have been that kind of woman; there had
to have been that kind of crowd too! Passers—by didn‘t all just
close their eyes and hurry by!) The quick young men immediately
became flustered. They can‘t work in the public eye. They got
into their car and fled. (Right then and there she should have
gone to a railroad station and left! But she went home to spend
the night. And during the night they took her off to the Lub—
yanka.)

Instead, not one sound comes from your parched lips, and
that passing crowd naively believes that you and your execu—
tioners are friends out for a stroll.

I myself often had the chance to cry out.

On the eleventh day after my arrest, three SMERSH bums,
more burdened by four suitcases full of war booty than by me
(they had come to rely on me in the course of the long trip),
brought me to the Byelorussian Station in Moscow. They were
called a Special Convoy—in other words, a special escort guard
—but in actual fact their automatic pistols only interfered with
their dragging along the four terribly heavy bags of loot they
and their chiefs in SMERSH counterintelligence on the Second
Byelorussian Front had plundered in Germany and were now
bringing to their families in the Fatherland under the pretext of
convoying me. I myself lugged a fifth suitcase with no great joy
since it contained my diaries and literary works, which were
being used as evidence against me.

Not one of the three knew the city, and it was up to me to pick
the shortest route to the prison. I had personally to conduct them
to the Lubyanka, where they had never been before (and which,
in fact, I confused with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs).

I had spent one day in the counterintelligence prison at army
headquarters and three days in the counterintelligence prison at
the headquarters of the front, where my cellmates had educated
me in the deceptions practiced by the interrogators, their threats
and beatings; in the fact that once a person was arrested he was
never released; and in the inevitability of a tenner, a ten—year
sentence; and then by a miracle I had suddenly burst out of there
and for four days had traveled like a free person among free
people, even though my flanks had already lain on rotten straw
