194 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

oners of Tsarist times are left. I am one of the last. All the hard—
labor politicals have been destroyed, and they even dissolved
our society in the thirties." "Why?" I asked. "So we would not
get together and discuss things." And although these simple
words, spoken in a calm tone, should have been shouted to the
heavens, should have shattered windowpanes, I understood them
only as indicating one more of Stalin‘s evil deeds. It was a trouble—
some fact, but without roots.

One thing is absolutely definite: not everything that enters
our ears penetrates our consciousness. Anything too far out of
tune with our attitude is lost, either in the ears themselves or
somewhere beyond, but it is lost. And even though I clearly re—
member Fastenko‘s many stories, I recall his opinions but
vaguely. He gave me the names of various books which he
strongly advised me to read whenever I got back to freedom. In
view of his age and his health, he evidently did not count on
getting out of prison alive, and he got some satisfaction from
hoping that I would someday understand his ideas. I couldn‘t
write down the list of books he suggested, and even as it was there
was a great deal of prison life for me to remember, but I at least
remembered those titles which were closest to my taste then:
Untimely Thoughts by Gorky (whom I regarded very highly at
that time, since he had, after all, outdone all the other classical
Russian writers in being proletarian) and Plekhanov‘s 4 Year
in the Motherland.

Today, when I read what Plekhanov wrote on October 28,
1917, I can clearly reconstruct what Fastenko himself thought:

. . . I am disappointed by the events of the last days not because I
do not desire the triumph of the working class in Russia but precisely
because I pray for it with all the strength of my soul. . . . [We must]
remember Engels‘ remark that there could be no greater historical
tragedy for the working class than to seize political power when it is
not ready for it. [Such a seizure of power] would compel it to retreat
far back from the positions which were won in February and March of
the present year. *

When Fastenko returned to Russia, pressure was put on him,
out of respect for his old underground exploits, to accept an

11. G. V. Plekhanov, "An Open Letter to the Workers of Petrograd," in
the newspaper Yedinstvo, October 28, 1917.
