150 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

to come in during the day, at night, sit for hours and hours—but
not split your skull over "proof." (Let the prisoner‘s head ache
over that.) And you don‘t have to worry whether the prisoner is
guilty or not but simply do what the Organs require. And every—
thing will be all right. It will be up to you to make the interroga—
tion periods pass as pleasurably as possible and not to get overly
fatigued. And it would be nice to get some good out of it—at least
to amuse yourself. You have been sitting a long time, and all of
a sudden a new method of persuasion occurs to you! Eureka! So
you call up your friends on the phone, and you go around to other
offices and tell them about it—what a laugh! Who shall we try it
on, boys? It‘s really pretty monotonous to keep doing the same
thing all the time. Those trembling hands, those imploring eyes,
that cowardly submissiveness—they are really a bore. If you
could just get one of them to resist! "I love strong opponents!
It‘s such fun to break their backs!" said the Leningrad interrogator
Shitov to G. G v.

And if your opponent is so strong that he refuses to give in,
all your methods have failed, and you are in a rage? Then don‘t
control your fury! It‘s tremendously satisfying, that outburst! Let
your anger have its way; don‘t set any bounds to it! Don‘t hold
yourself back! That‘s when interrogators spit in the open mouth
of the accused! And shove his face into a full cuspidor!® That‘s
the state of mind in which they drag priests around by their long
hair! Or urinate in a kneeling prisoner‘s face! After such a storm
of fury you feel yourself a real honest—to—God man!

Or else you are interrogating a "foreigner‘s girl friend."" So you
curse her out and then you say: "Come on now, does an American
have a special kind of ? Is that it? Weren‘t there enough
Russian ones for you?" And all of a sudden you get an idea:
maybe she learned something from those foreigners. Here‘s a
chance not to be missed, like an assignment abroad! And so you
begin to interrogate her energetically: How? What positions?
More! In detail! Every scrap of information! (You can use the
information yourself, and you can tell the other boys too!) The
girl is blushing all over and in tears. "It doesn‘t have anything to
do with the case," she protests. "Yes, it does, speak up!" That‘s

 

 

8. As happened with Vasilyev, according to Ivanov—Razumnik.
9. Esfir R., 1947.
