356 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

and even called into battle the military cadets of that deposed
government.

Defeated in battle, they did not repent politically. They did
not get down on their knees to the Council of People‘s Com—
missars, which had declared itself to be the government. They
continued to insist stubbornly that the only legal government was
the one which had been overthrown. They refused to admit right
away that what had been their political line for twenty years was
a failure," and they did not ask to be pardoned, nor to have
their party dissolved and cease to be considered a party.""

The second charge against them was that they had deepened
the abyss of the Civil War by taking part in demonstrations—by
this token, rebellions—on January 5 and 6, 1918, against the
lawful authority of the workers‘ and peasants‘ government. They
were supporting their illegal Constituent Assembly (elected by
universal, free, equal, secret, and direct voting) against the sailors >
and the Red Guards, who legally dispersed both the Assembly
and the demonstrators. (And what good could have come of
peaceable sessions of the Constituent Assembly? Only the con—
flagration . of a three—year—long Civil War. And that is why the
Civil War began, because not all the people submitted simul—
taneously and obediently to the lawful decrees of the Council of
People‘s Commissars.)

The third charge was that they had not recognized the peace
treaty of Brest—Litovsk, that lawful, lifesaving peace of Brest—
Litovsk, which had cut off not Russia‘s head but only parts of
its torso. By this token, declared the official indictment, there
were present "all the signs of high freason and criminal activity
directed to drawing the country into war."

High treason! That is another club with two ends. It all de—
pends on which end you have hold of.

From this followed the serious fourth charge: in the summer
and fall of 1918, those final months and weeks when the Kaiser‘s
Germany was scarcely managing to hold its own against the
Allies, and the Soviet government, faithful to the Brest treaty,

19. And it had indeed been a failure, although this did not become clear
immediately.

20. In the same way, all the local Russian governments, and those in outly—
ing areas, were illegal—those in Archangel, Samara, Ufa or Omsk, the Ukraine,
the Don, the Kuban, the Urals or Transcaucasia—inasmuch as they all de—

clared themselves to be governments after the Council of People‘s Commissars
had declared itself to be the government.
