The Baw:as a Child | 329

agent of European 1mper1ahsm The intelligentsia trampled on
its own banners [as in: the army, yes?] and‘covered them with
mud,""

How, indeed, can we not;.cry out our hearts in repentance?
How can we not lacerate our. chests:with our. fingernails?

And the only reason why ‘ithere is no need to deal out the
death blow to its individual representatives" is that "this social
group has outlived its time.""

Here, at the start of the twentieth century! What power of
foresight! Oh, scientific revolutionaries! (However, the intel—
ligentsia had to be finished off anyway. Throughout the twenties
they kept finishing them off and finishing them off.)

We examine with hostility the twenty—eight individual allies of
the black generals, the hirelings of European imperialism. And
we are especially aroused by the stench of the word Center. Now
we see a Tactical Center, now a National Center, and now a
Right Center. (And in our recollection of the trials of two
decades, Centers keep creeping in all the time, Centers and
Centers, Engineers‘ Centers Menshevik Centers, Trotskyite—
Zinovievite Centers, Rightist—Bukharinite Centers, but all of them
are crushed, all crushed, and that is the only reason you and I are
still alive.) Wherever there is a Center, of course, the hand of
imperialism can be found.

True, we feel a measure of relief when we learn that the
Tactical Center on this occasion was not an organization; that it
did not have: (1) statutes; (2) a program; (3) membership
dues. So, what did: it have? Here‘s what: They used to meet!
(Goose—pimples up and: down the back!) And when they met,
they undertook to familiarize themselves with one another‘s point
of view! (Icy chills!)

The charges were extremely serious and were supported by
the evidence. There were two (2) pieces of evidence to cor—
roborate the charges against twenty—eight accused individuals."
These were two letters from people who were not present in court
because they were abroad: Myakotin and Fyodorov. They were
absent, but until the October Revolution they had been members

60. Krylenko, op. cit., p. 54.
61. Ibid., p. 38.
62. Ibid.
