The Interrogation | 101

mortal men to establish absolute truth, but relative truth only.
He then proceeded to a further step, which jurists of the last two
thousand years had not been willing to take: that the truth estab—
lished by interrogation and trial could not be absolute, but only,
so to speak, relative. Therefore, when we sign a sentence ordering
someone to be shot we can never be absolutely certain, but only
approximately, in view of certain hypotheses, and in a certain
sense, that we are punishing a guilty person." Thence arose the
most practical conclusion: that it was useless to seek absolute
evidence—for evidence is always relative—or unchallengeable
witnesses—for they can say different things at different times.
The proofs of guilt were relative, approximate, and the interro—
gator could find them, even when there was no evidence and no
witness, without leaving his office, "basing his conclusions not
only on his own intellect but also on his Party sensitivity, his
moral forces" (in other words, the superiority of someone who
has slept well, has been well fed, and has not been beaten up)
"and on his character" (i.e., his willingness to apply cruelty!).

Of course, this formulation was much more elegant than
Latsis‘ instructions. But the essence of both was the same.

In only one respect did Vyshinsky fail to be consistent and
retreat from dialectical logic: for some reason, the executioner‘s
bullet which he allowed was not relative but absolute. . . .

Thus it was that the conclusions of advanced Soviet jurispru—
dence, proceeding in a spiral, returned to barbaric or medieval
standards. Like medieval torturers, our interrogators, prosecutors,
and judges agreed to accept the confession of the accused as the
chief proof of guilt.®

However, the simple—minded Middle Ages used dramatic and

8. Perhaps Vyshinsky, no less than his listeners, needed this ideological com—
fort at this time. When he cried out from the prosecutor‘s platform: "Shoot
them all like mad dogs!" he, at least, who was both evil and quick of mind,
understood that the accused were innocent. And in all probability he and that
whale of Marxist dialectics, the defendant Bukharin, devoted themselves with
all the greater passion to the dialectical elaboration of the judicial lie: for Bu—
kharin it was too stupid and futile to die if he was altogether innocent (thus he
needed to find his own guilt!); and for Vyshinsky it was more agreeable to see
himself as a logician than as a plain downright scoundrel.

9. Compare the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States:
"Nor shall [any person] be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness
against himself." Not be compelled! (The same thing appears in the seventeenth—
century Bill of Rights.)
