That Spring | 275

with such intensity as they did that spring! And never in my life
had I seen anything closer to God‘s paradise than that little
Butyrki park, which never took more than thirty seconds to
cross on the asphalt path."

They took us to the Butyrki station—a very well—chosen nick—
name for that reception and dispatch point, especially because its
main hall was really like a good railroad station. They pushed
us into a large, spacious box. It was half—dark inside and the air
was clean and fresh, since its one and only little window was very
high up and had no "muzzle." And it opened on that same sunny
little park, and through the transom the birds‘ twitter deafened
us, and in the opening a little bright—green twig hung, promising
us all freedom and home. (We had never been imprisoned in such
a good box—and that couldn‘t be a matter of chance!)

And we were all cases for the OSO‘s—the Special Boards at—
tached to the GPU—NKVD. And it turned out that each of us had
been imprisoned for nothing much.

No one touched us for three hours. No one opened the doors.
We paced up and down the box and, finally, tired out, we sat
down on the slab benches. And the little twig kept bobbing and
bobbing outside the opening, and the sparrows screamed as if
they were possessed.

Suddenly the door crashed open, and one of us was summoned,
a quiet bookkeeper, thirty—five years old. He went out. The door
was locked. We started running about our box even more agi—
tatedly than before. We were on hot coals.

Once more the crash of the door. They called another one
out and readmitted the first. We rushed to him. But he was not
the same man! The life had gone out of his face. His wide—open
eyes were unseeing. His movements were uncertain as he stum—
bled across the smooth floor of the box. Was he in a state of
shock? Had they swatted him with an ironing board?

"Well? Well?" we asked him, with sinking hearts. (If he had
not in fact just gotten up from the electric chair, he must at the

19. Many years later, this time as a tourist, I saw another, similar park,
except that it was even smaller, in the Trubetskoi bastion of the Peter and
Paul Fortress in Leningrad. The other tourists exclaimed over the darkness of
the corridors and cells, but I kept thinking to myself that with such a park to
walk in, the prisoners of the Trubetskoi bastion were not lost men. We were
taken out to walk only in deathly cell—like stone enclosures.
