602 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

musician and conservatory student Volodya Klempner, a com—
poser. A woodcutter and hunter from the Vyatka forests, as pro—
found as a forest lake. An Orthodox preacher from Europe,
Yevgeny Ivanovich Divnich. He did not confine himself to
theology, but condemned Marxism, declaring that no one in
Europe had taken it seriously for a long while—and I defended
it, because after all I was a Marxist. And even a year ago I
would have confidently demolished him with quotations; how
disparagingly I would have mocked him! But my first year as
a prisoner had left its mark inside me—and just when had that
happened? I hadn‘t noticed: there had been so many new events,
sights, meanings, that I could no longer say: "They don‘t exist!
That‘s a bourgeois lie!" And now I had to admit: "Yes, they do
exist." And right at that point my whole line of reasoning began
to weaken, and so they could beat me in our arguments without
half—trying.

And again the POW‘s kept coming and coming and coming—
this was the second year of the wave of them that kept unceasingly
coming from Europe. And once more there were Russian émigrés
—from Europe, from Manchuria. One went about among the
émigrés seeking news of acquaintances by first asking what
country they had come from, and did they know so and so? Yes,
of course, they did. (And that is how I learned of the execution
of Colonel Yasevich.)

And the old German, that portly German, now emaciated and
ill, whom I had once upon a time back in East Prussia (was it
two hundred years ago?) forced to carry my suitcase. Oh, how
small the world really is! Strange fate that brought us together
again‘! The old man smiled at me. He recognized me too, and
even seemed pleased by our meeting. He had forgiven me. He had
been sentenced to ten years, but he certainly didn‘t have anywhere
near that long to live. And there was another German there too—
lanky and young, but unresponsive—perhaps because he didn‘t
know one word of Russian. You wouldn‘t even take him for a
German right off the bat: the thieves had torn off everything
German he had on and given him a faded old Soviet field shirt in
exchange. He was a famous German air ace. His first campaign
had been in the war between Bolivia and Paraguay, his second in
Spain, his third Poland, his fourth over England, his fifth Cyprus,
