380 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

of tons of petroleum [i.e., it had been thus ordered from on high] . ..
because, no matter what, 42 million tons of petroleum could not have
been produced under any circumstances whatever."""

All the work of that unhappy generation of our engineers was
squeezed between two such impossibilities. The Thermal Engineering
Institute was proud of its principal research achievement, which was
the sharply improved coefficient of fuel consumption. On this basis,
lower requirements for fuel production had been stipulated in the
preliminary plan. And that meant wrecking—reducing fuel resources.
In the transportation plan, they had provided for all freight cars to
be equipped with automatic coupling. And that meant wrecking:
they had tied up capital funds. After all, it takes a long time to intro—
duce automatic coupling, and the capital investment involved in
installing it can only be recouped over a long period, and we want
everything immediately! In order to make more efficient use of single—
track railroads, they decided to increase the size of the locomotives and
freight cars. And was that considered modernization? No, it was wreck—
ing. Because in that case it would have been necessary to invest funds in
strengthening the roadbeds and the superstructures of the bridges.
From the profound economic consideration that in America capital
is cheap and labor dear, and that the situation here is just the opposite,
and that we therefore ought not to borrow things with monkeylike
imitativeness, Fedotov concluded that it was useless for us to purchase
expensive American assembly—line machinery. For the next ten years
it would be more profitable for us to buy less sophisticated English
machinery and to put more workers on it, since it was inevitable that
in ten years‘ time whatever we had purchased would be replaced
anyway, no matter what. And we could then buy more expensive
machinery. So that, too, was wrecking. Alleging economy as his
reason, what he really wanted, they charged, was to avoid having the
most advanced type of machinery in Soviet industry. They began to
build new factories out of reinforced concrete, instead of cheaper
ordinary concrete, on the grounds that over a hundred—year period
reinforced concrete would recoup the additional investment many
times over. So that, too, was wrecking: tying up capital; using up
scarce reinforcing rods when iron was in short supply. (What was it
supposed to be kept for—false teeth?)

From among the defendants, Fedotov willingly conceded: Of
course, if every kopeck must be counted today, then it could be
considered wrecking. The English say: I‘m not rich enough to
buy cheap goods.

10. Ibid., p. 325.
