102 | THE GULAG ARCHIPEL AGO

picturesque methods to squeeze out the desired confessions: the
rack, the wheel, the bed of nails, impalement, hot coals, etc. In
the twentieth century, taking advantage of our more highly de—
veloped medical knowledge and extensive prison experience (and
someone seriously defended a doctoral dissertation on this
theme), people came to realize that the accumulation of such
impressive apparatus was superfluous and that, on a mass scale,
it was also cumbersome. And in addition . . .

In addition, there was evidently one other circumstance. As
always, Stalin did not pronounce that final word, and his sub—
ordinates had to guess what he wanted. Thus, like a jackal, he left
himself an escape hole, so that he could, if he wanted, beat a
retreat and write about "dizziness from success." After all, for
the first time in human history the calculated torture of millions
was being undertaken, and, even with all his strength and power,
Stalin could not be absolutely sure of success. In dealing with
such an enormous mass of material, the effects of the experiment
might differ from those obtained from a smaller sample. An un—
foreseen explosion might take place, a slippage in a geological
fault, or even world—wide disclosure. In any case, Stalin had to
remain innocent, his sacred vestments angelically pure.

We are therefore forced to conclude that no list of tortures
and torments existed in printed form for the guidance of interro—
gators! Instead, all that was required was for every Interrogation
Department to supply the tribunal within a specified period with
a stipulated number of rabbits who had confessed everything.
And it was simply stated, orally but often, that any measures and
means employed were good, since they were being used for a
Jlofty purpose; that no interrogator would be made to answer for
the death of an accused; and that the prison doctor should inter—
fere as little as possible with the course of the investigation. In all
probability, they exchanged experiences in comradely fashion;
"they learned from the most successful workers." Then, too,
"material rewards" were offered—higher pay for night work,
bonus pay for fast work—and there were also definite warnings
that interrogators who could not cope with their tasks . . . Even
the chief of some provincial NKVD administration, if some sort
of mess developed, could show Stalin his hands were clean: he
had issued no direct instructions to use torture! But at the same
time he had ensured that torture would be used!
