504 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

categories got mixed up, and clarity was shattered into fragments.
(And it would take a long time for the prisoner to put two and
two together and figure out that this horde of devils were hand
in glove with the jailers.)

To strike out boldly, a person has to feel that his rear is de—
fended, that he has support on both his flanks, that there is solid
earth beneath his feet. All these conditions were absent for the
Article 58‘s. Having passed through the meat grinder of political
interrogation, the human being was physically crushed in body:
he had been starved, he hadn‘t slept, he had frozen in punishment
cells, he had lain there a beaten man. But it wasn‘t only his body.
His soul was crushed too. Over and over he had been told and
had had demonstrated to him that his views, and his conduct in
life, and his relationships with people had all been wrong because
they had brought him to ruin. All that was left in that scrunched—
up wad the engine room of the law had spewed out into the
prisoner transport was a greed for life, and no understanding
whatever. To crush him once and for all and to cut him off from
all others once and for all—that was the function of interrogation
under Article 58. The convicted prisoner had to learn that his
worst guilt out in freedom had been his attempt somehow to get
together or unite with others by any route but the Party organizer,
the trade—union organizer, or the administration. In prison this
fear went so far as to become fear of all kinds of collective action:
two voices uttering the same complaint or two prisoners signing
a complaint on one piece of paper. Gun—shy now and for a good
long time to come of any and every kind of collaboration or
unification, the pseudo politicals were not prepared to unite even
against the thieves. Nor would they even think of bringing along
a weapon—a knife or a bludgeon—for the Stolypin car or the
transit prison. In the first place, why have one? And against
whom? In the second place, if you did use it, then, considering
the aggravating circumstance of your malevolent Article 58, you
might be shot when you were retried. In the third place, even
before that, your punishment for having a knife when they
searched you would be very different from the thief‘s. For him to
have a knife was mere misbehavior, tradition, he didn‘t know any
better. But for you to have one was "terrorism."

Finally, many of the people imprisoned under Article 58 were
