28 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

who fell within the broad definition of insects; the population of
Russia was too heterogeneous and encompassed small, special
groups, entirely superfluous and, today, forgotten. The people in
the local zemstvo self—governing bodies in the provinces were,
of course, insects. People in the cooperative movement were also
insects, as were all owners of their own homes. There were not a
few insects among the teachers in the gymnasiums. The church
parish councils were made up almost exclusively of insects, and
it was insects, of course, who sang in church choirs. All priests
were insects—and monks and nuns even more so. And all those
Tolstoyans who, when they undertook to serve the Soviet govern—
ment on, for example, the railroads, refused to sign the required
oath to defend the Soviet government with gun in hand thereby
showed themselves to be insects too. (We will later see some of
them on trial.) The railroads were particularly important, for
there were indeed many insects hidden beneath railroad uni—
forms, and they had to be rooted out and some of them slapped
down. And telegraphers, for some reason, were, for the most
part, inveterate insects who had no sympathy for the Soviets.
Nor could you say a good word about Vikzhel, the All—Russian
Executive Committee of the Union of Railroad Workers, nor
about the other trade unions, which were often filled with insects
hostile to the working class.

Just those groups we have so far enumerated represent an
enormous number of people—several years‘ worth of purge
activity.

In addition, how many kinds of cursed intellectuals there were
—restless students and a variety of eccentrics, truth—seekers, and
holy fools, of whom even Peter the Great had tried in vain to
purge Russia and who are always a hindrance to a well—ordered,
strict regime.

It would have been impossible to carry out this hygienic purg—
ing, especially under wartime conditions, if they had had to
follow outdated legal processes and normal judicial procedures.
And so an entirely new form was adopted: extrajudicial reprisal,
and this thankless job was self—sacrificingly assumed by the Che—
ka, the Sentinel of the Revolution, which was the only punitive
organ in human history that combined in one set of hands in—
vestigation, arrest, interrogation, prosecution, trial, and execu—
tion of the verdict.
