The Interrogation | 99

to accompany them. This was not peculiar to 1937 alone. It was
a chronic, general practice. And that is why it seems strange
today to read in the recollections of former zeks that "torture was
permitted from the spring of 1938 on.""" There were never any
spiritual or moral barriers which could have held the Organs
back from torture. In the early postwar years, in the Cheka
Weekly, The Red Sword, and Red Terror, the admissibility of
torture from a Marxist point of view was openly debated. Judging
by the subsequent course of events, the answer deduced was
positive, though not universally so.

It is more accurate to say that if before 1938 some kind of
formal documentation was required as a preliminary to torture,
as well as specific permission for each case under investigation
(even though such permission was easy to obtain), then in the
years 1937—1938, in view of the extraordinary situation prevail—
ing (the specified millions of admissions to the Archipelago had
to be ground through the apparatus of individual interrogation
in specified, limited periods, something which had simply not
happened in the mass waves of kulaks and nationalities), inter—
rogators were allowed to use violence and torture on an unlimited
basis, at their own discretion, and in accordance with the demands
of their work quotas and the amount of time they were given.
The types of torture used were not regulated and every kind of
ingenuity was permitted, no matter what.

In 1939 such indiscriminate authorization was withdrawn,
and once again written permission was required for torture, and
perhaps it may not have been so easily granted. (Of course, sim—
ple threats, blackmail, deception, exhaustion through enforced
sleeplessness, and punishment cells were never prohibited.) Then,
from the end of the war and throughout the postwar years, certain
categories of prisoners were established by decree for whom a
broad range of torture was automatically permitted. Among these
were nationalists, particularly the Ukrainians and the Lithuani—
ans, especially in those cases where an underground organization

7. Y. Ginzburg writes that permission for "physical measures of persuasion"
was given in April, 1938. V. Shalamov believes that tortures were permitted
from the middle of 1938 on. The old prisoner M———ch is convinced that there
was an "order to simplify the questioning and to change from psychological
methods to physical methods." Ivanov—Razumnik singles out the middle of 1938
as the "period of the most cruel interrogations."
