The Bluecaps | 155

chased out of the station restaurant and had girls and women
rounded up and forced to dance naked on the tables to entertain
him and his drinking companions. He would have gotten away
with this too, but he violated another important rule. Like Kruzh—
kov, he went against his own kind. Kruzhkov deceived the Organs.
And this colonel did perhaps even worse. He laid bets on which
wives he could seduce, and not just ordinary wives, but the
wives of his colleagues in the Security police. And he was not
forgiven! He was sentenced to a political prison under Article
58, and was serving out his time fuming at their having dared to
arrest him. He had no doubt they would change their minds. (And
perhaps they did.)

That dread fate—to be thrown into prison themselves—was
not such a rarity for the bluecaps. There was no genuine insur—
ance against it. But somehow these men were slow to sense the les—
sons of the past. Once again this was probably due to their hav—
ing no higher powers of reason; their low—grade intellect would
tell them: It happens only rarely; very few get caught; it may
pass me by; my friends won‘t let me down.

Friends, as a matter of fact, did try not to leave their friends
in a bad spot. They had their own unspoken understanding: at
least to arrange favorable conditions for friends. (This was the
case, for example, with Colonel I. Y. Vorobyev in the Marfino
Special Prison, and with the same V. N. THlin who was in the
Lubyanka for more than eight years.) Thanks to this caste spirit,
those arrested singly, as a result of only personal shortcomings,
usually did not do too badly. And that was how they were able
to justify their sense of immunity from punishment in their day—
to—day work in the service. But there were several known cases
when camp Security officers were tossed into ordinary camps to
serve out their sentences. There were even instances when as
prisoners they ran into zeks who had once been under their thumb
and came off badly in the encounter. For example, Security of—
ficer Munshin, who cherished a particularly violent hatred toward
the 58‘s in camp and had relied heavily on the support of the
blatnye, the habitual thieves, was driven right under the board
bunks by those very same thieves. However, we have no way to
learn more details about these cases in order to be able to explain
them.

But those gaybisty—the State Security officers—who got
