50 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

the GPU was working flawlessly: thousands of defendants had al—
ready fully confessed their adherence to the TKP and participa—
tion in its criminal plans. And no less than two kundred thousand
"members" altogether were promised by the GPU. Mentioned as
"heading" the party were the agricultural economist Aleksandr
Vasilyevich Chayanov; the future "Prime Minister" N. D. Kon—
dratyev; L. N. Yurovsky; Makarov; and Aleksei Doyarenko, a
professor from the Timiryazev Academy (future Minister of
Agriculture)."

Then all of a sudden, one lovely night, Stalin reconsidered.
Why? Maybe we will never know. Did he perhaps wish to save
his soul? Too soon for that, it would seem. Did his sense of humor
come to the fore—was it all so deadly, monotonous, so bitter—
tasting? But no one would ever dare accuse Stalin of having a
sense of humor! Likeliest of all, Stalin simply figured out that the
whole countryside, not just 200,000 people, would soon die of
famine anyway, so why go to the trouble? And instantly the
whole TKP trial was called off. All those who had "confessed"
were told they could repudiate their confessions (one can picture
their happiness!). And instead of the whole big catch, only the
small group of Kondratyev and Chayanov was hauled in and
tried."* (In 1941, the charge against the tortured Vavilov was
that the TKP had existed and he had been its head.)

Paragraph piles on paragraph, year on year—and yet there is
no way we can describe in sequence everything that took place
(but the GPU did iis job effectively! The GPU never let anything
get by!). But we must always remember that:

e Religious believers, of course, were being arrested uninter—
ruptedly. (There were, nonetheless, certain special dates and peak
periods. There was a "night of struggle against religion" in
Leningrad on Christmas Eve, 1929, when they arrested a large
part of the religious intelligentsia and held them—not just until
morning either. And that was certainly no "Christmas tale."

23. He might well have been a better one than those who held the job for
the next forty years! But how strange is human fate! As a matter of principle,
Doyarenko was always nonpolitical! When his daughter used to bring home
fellow students who expressed opinions savoring of Socialist Revolutionary
views, he made them leave!

24. Kondratyev, sentenced to solitary confinement, became mentally ill there

and died. Yurovsky also died. Chayanov was exiled to Alma—Ata after five years
in solitary and was arrested again there in 1948.
