In the Engine Room | 281

One cannot really say that the OSO had been conceived after the
Revolution. Catherine the Great had sentenced the journalist
Novikov, whom she disliked, to fifteen years on, one might say,
an OSO basis, since she didn‘t turn him over to a court. And all
the Tsars onee in a while, in a fatherly way, exiled without any
trial those who had incurred their displeasure. In the 1860‘s, a
basic court reform took place. It seemed as if rulers and subjects
had both begun to develop something like a juridical view of
society. And yet in the seventies and eighties Korolenko tracked
down cases where administrative repression had usurped the role
of judicial judgment. In 1872, he himself and two other students
were exiled without trial, on the orders of the Deputy Minister of
State Properties—a typical case of an OSO. Another time, he and
his brother were exiled without trial to Glazov. Korolenko has
also given us the name of one Fyodor Bogdan, an emissary from
the peasants—a khodok—who got right up to the Tsar himself
and was then exiled. And of Pyankov, too, who was acquitted
by a court and yet exiled by order of the Tsar. And there were
several others as well. And Vera Zasulich explained in a letter
sent after she emigrated that she had not run away from the
court and a trial but from nonjudicial administrative repres—
sion.

Thus the tradition of the "dotted line"—the administratively
issued sentence—dragged on. But it was too lax; it was suitable
for a drowsy Asiatic country, but not for a country that was
rapidly advancing. ... . Moreover, it lacked any definite identity:
who was the OSO? Sometimes it was the Tsar, sometimes the
governor, sometimes the deputy minister. And if it was still
possible to emumerate names and cases, this was not, begging
your pardon, real scope.

Real scope entered the picture with the twenties, when per—
manently operating Troikas—panels of three, operating behind
closed doors—were created to bypass the courts permanently.
In the beginning they even flaunted it proudly—the Troika of the
GPU. Not only did they not conceal the names of the members;
they publicized them. Who on the Solovetsky Islands did not
know the names of the famous Moscow Troika—Gleb Boky,
