First Cell, First Love | 199

ticular work superintendent—after that, it was up to them to
manage to fulfill their norm with their own resources. How many
hours they had to work to do it or what ration they had to get
along on were details that didn‘t concern him.

The war years deep in the rear were the best years in Z———v‘s
life, Such is the eternal and universal aspect of war: the more
grief it accumulates at one of its poles, the more joy it generates
at the other. Z———v had not only a bulldog‘s jaw but also a
swift, enterprising, businesslike grasp. With the greatest skill he
immediately switched to the economy‘s new wartime thythm.
Everything for victory. Give and take, and the war will write it
all off. He made just one small concession to the war. He got
along without suits and neckties, and, camouflaging himself in
khaki color, had chrome—leather boots made to order and donned
a general‘s tunic—the very one in which he appeared before us.
That was fashionable and not uncommon at the time. It provoked
neither anger in the war—wounded nor reproachful glances from
women.

Women usually looked at him with another sort of glance.
They came to him to get well fed, to get warmed up, to have
some fun. He had wild money passing through his hands. His
billfold bulged like a little barrel with expense money, and to
him ten—ruble notes were like kopecks, and thousands like single
rubles. Z———v didn‘t hoard them, regret spending them, or
keep count of them. He counted only the women who passed
through his hands, and particularly those he had "uncorked."
This count was his sport. In the cell he assured us that his arrest
had broken off the count at 290 plus, and he regretted that he
had not reached 300. Since it was wartime and the women were
alone and lonely. And since, in addition to his power and money,
he had the virility of a Rasputin, one can probably believe him.
And he was quite prepared to describe one episode after another.
It was just that our ears were not prepared to listen to him. Even
though no danger threatened him during those last years, he had
frantically grabbed these women, messed them up, and then
thrown them away, like a greedy diner eating boiled crayfish—
grabbing one, devouring it, sucking it, then grabbing the next.

He was so accustomed to the malleability of material, to his
own vigorous boarlike drive across the land! (Whenever he was
