The Ports of the Archipelago | 537

got some. Prisoners began to fight in front of the tanks—and the
guards fired on them from the towers. Exactly like under the
Fascists! Major General Derevyanko, the Chief of Administration
of the Northeast [i.e., Kolymal Corrective Labor Camps, came,
and while he was there an air force aviator stepped out in front
of the crowd and ripped his field shirt down the front: ‘I have
seven battle decorations! Who gave you the right to shoot into the
compound? And Derevyanko replied: ‘We shot and we will go
on shooting until you learn how to behave.‘ "*

"No, boys, none of those are real transit prisons. Now take
Kirov! That was a real one! Let‘s not take any special year, but,
say, 1947. Even then in Kirov two turnkeys had to work together
with their boots to jam people into a cell, that being the only way
they could get the door shut. In September (and Kirov—formerly
Vyatka—isn‘t on the Black Sea either) everyone was sitting
naked on the three—story bunks because of the heat. They were
sitting because there was no place to lie down: one row sat at the
heads of the bunks and one row at the feet. And two rows sat
on the floor in the aisle, and others stood between them, and
they took turns. They kept their knapsacks in their hands or
on their knees because there was nowhere to put them down.
Only the thieves were in their lawful places, the second—story
bunks next to the windows, and they spread out as they pleased.
There were so many bedbugs that they went right on biting in
the daytime, and they dive—bombed straight from the ceiling.
And people had to suffer through that for a week or even a
month."

I myself would like to interrupt in order to tell about Krasnaya
Presnya® in August, 1945, in the Victory summer, but I am shy:
after all, in Krasnaya Presnya we could somehow stretch out our
legs at night, and the bedbugs were moderate, and flies bit us all
night long as we lay naked and sweaty under the bright lights,
but of course that‘s nothing at all, and I would be ashamed to
boast about it. We streamed with sweat every time we moved,

2. Say there, Bertrand Russell‘s "War Crimes Tribunal"! Why don‘t you
use this bit of material? Or doesn‘t it suit you?

3. This transit prison with its glorious revolutionary name is little known
to Muscovites. There are no excursions to it, and how could there be when
it is still in operation? But to get a close look at it, you don‘t have to travel
any distance at all. It‘s a mere stone‘s throw from the Novokhoroshevo High—
way on the circle line.
