The Interrogation | 139

Answer: I did. Question: How? Answer: Horseback, of course.
Conclusion: Take ten years for KRD.**

But that sort of pace smells of the Stakhanovite movement,
a movement which found no disciples among the bluecaps. Ac—
cording to the Code of Criminal Procedure every interrogation
was supposed to take two months. And if it presented difficulties,
one was allowed to ask the prosecutor for several continuations of
a month apiece (which, of course, the prosecutors never refused).
Thus it would have been stupid to risk one‘s health, not to take
advantage of these postponements, and, speaking in factory terms,
to raise one‘s work norms. Having worked with voice and fist in
the initial assault week of every interrogation, and thereby ex—
pended one‘s will and character (as per Vyshinsky), the inter—
rogators had a vital interest in dragging out the remainder of
every case as long as possible. That way more old, subdued cases
were on hand and fewer new ones. It was considered just indecent
to complete a political interrogation in two months.

The state system itself suffered from its own lack of trust and
from its rigidity. These interrogators were selected personnel, but
they weren‘t trusted either. In all probability they, too, were re—
quired to check in on arriving and check out on leaving, and the
prisoners were, of course, checked in and out when called for
questioning. What else could the interrogators do to keep the
bookkeepers‘ accounts straight? They would summon one of their
defendants, sit him down in a corner, ask him some terrifying
question—and then forget about him while they themselves sat
for a long time reading the paper, writing an outline for a political
indoctrination course or personal letters, or went off to visit one
another, leaving guards to act as watchdogs in their place. Peace—
fully batting the breeze on the sofa with a colleague who had just
dropped in, the interrogator would come to himself once in a
while, look threateningly at the accused, and say:

"Now there‘s a rat! There‘s a real rat for you! Well, that‘s all
right, we‘ll not be stingy about his nine grams!"

My interrogator also made frequent use of the telephone. For
example, he used to phone home and tell his wife—with his
sparkling eyes directed at me—that he was going to be working
all night long so she mustn‘t expect him before morning. (My

32. KRD = Counter—Revolutionary Activity.
