That Spring | 263

Soviet Union); that the incredible writer Nabokov—Sirin also
existed out there; that Bunin himself was still alive and had been
writing for all these twenty years; that;journals of the arts were
being published; that theatrical works were being produced; that
Russians from the same areas of Russia.came together in groups
where their mother tongue could ‘be heard; and that émigré men
had not given up marrying émigré women, who in turn presented
them with children, which meant young people our own age.

The picture of emigration presented in our country was so
falsified that if one had conducted a mass survey to ask which
side the Russian émigrés were on in the Spanish Civil War, or
else, perhaps, what side they were on in the Second World War,
with one voice everyone would have replied: For Franco! For
Hitler! Even now people in our country do not know that many
more White émigrés fought on the Republican side in Spain.
That both the Vlasov divisions and the Cossack corps of von
Pannwitz (the "Krasnov‘ corps) were made up of Soviet citizens
and not of émigrés. The émigrés did not support Hitler. They
ostracized Merezhkovsky and Gippius, who took Hitler‘s part,
leaving them to alienated loneliness. There was a joke—except
it wasn‘t a joke—to the effect that Denikin wanted to fight for
the Soviet Union against Hitler, and that at one time Stalin
planned to arrange his return to the Motherland, not for military
reasons, obviously, but as a symbol of national unity. During the
German occupation of France, a horde of Russian émigrés,
young: and old, joined the Resistance. And after the liberation
of Paris they swarmed to the Soviet Embassy to apply for per—
mission to return to the Motherland. No matter what kind of
Russia it was—it was still Russia! That was their slogan, and
that is how they proved they had not been lying previously about
their love for her. (Imprisoned in 1945 and 1946, they were
almost happy that these prison bars and these jailers were their
own, Russian. And they observed with surprise the Soviet boys
scratching their heads and saying: "Why the hell did we come
back? Wasn‘t there room enough for us in Europe?")

But, given that Stalinist logic which said that every Soviet
person who had lived abroad had to be imprisoned in camp, how
could the émigrés possibly escape the same lot? In the Balkans,
Central Europe, Harbin, they were arrested: as soon as the Soviet
