340 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

Commission of the Moscow Soviet. The Commission found that
the "state of the water system was satisfactory and that its techni—
cal direction was efficient." Oldenborger denied all the accusa—
tions. And then Sedelnikov placidly declared: "I had set myself
the task of stirring up a fuss about this matter in order to get the
question of the spetsy taken up."

What remained for the leaders of the workers to do at this
point? What was the final, infallible method? A denunciation to
the Cheka! Sedelnikov resorted to just that! He "painted a picture
of the conscious wrecking of the water system by Oldenborger."
He did not have the slightest doubt that "a counterrevolutionary
organization" existed "in the water system, in the heart of Red
Moscow." And, furthermore, a catastrophic situation at the
Rublevo water tower!

At this point, Oldenborger was guilty of a tactless act of rude—
ness, the outburst of a spineless, interim intellectual. They had
refused to authorize his order for new boilers from abroad—
and at the time, in Russia, it was quite impossible to fix the old
ones. So Oldenborger committed suicide. (It had been just too
much for one man—after all, he hadn‘t undergone the condition—
ing for that sort of thing.)

The cause was not lost, however. They could find a counter—
revolutionary organization without him. RKI men would now
undertake to expose the whole thing. Some concealed maneuver—
ing went on for two months. But such was the spirit at the
beginning of the NEP that "a lesson had to be taught both one
side and the other." So there was a trial in the Supreme Tribunal.
Krylenko was moderately severe. Krylenko was moderately merci—
less. He was understanding: "The Russian worker, of course, was
right to see in every person not of his own class someone more
likely to be an enemy than a friend.‘"" Nevertheless: "Given
the further change in our practical and general policy, perhaps
we must be prepared for still greater concessions, for retreating
and maneuvering. Perhaps the Party will be forced to adopt a
tactical program of action which the primitive logic of honest,
dedicated warriors is going to protest."®

Well, it‘s a fact, the workers who testified against Comrade

7. Ibid., p. 435.
8. Ibid., p. 438.
