The Supreme Measure | 455

And either he or his shirt was doused in a sweetish perfume that
drifted into the cell.

Vlasov swiftly jumped up on the cot and shouted shrilly: "What
kind of colonial officer is this? Get out of here, you murderer!"
And from that height he spat juicily full into Chinguli‘s face.

And he hit his mark.

Chinguli wiped his face and retreated. Because he had no right
to enter the cell without six guards, and maybe not even with six
guards either.

A reasonable rabbit ought not to behave in that fashion. What
if Chinguli had been dealing with your case at that moment and
was the one to decide whether to commute or not? After all, he
must have had a reason for asking: "Who is here from the Kady
case?" That was probably why he came.

But there is a limit, and beyond it one is no longer willing, one
finds it too repulsive, to be a reasonable little rabbit. And that is
the limit beyond which rabbits are enlightened by the common
understanding that all rabbits are foredoomed to become only
meat and pelts, and that at best, therefore, one can gain only a
postponement of death and not life in any case. That is when one
wants to shout: "Curse you, hurry up and shoot!"

It was this particular feeling of rage which took hold of Vlasov
even more intensely during his forty—one days of waiting for
execution. In the Ivanovo Prison they had twice suggested that he
write a petition for pardon, but he had refused.

But on the forty—second day they summoned him to a box
where they informed him that the Presidium of the Supreme
Soviet had commuted the supreme measure of punishment to
twenty years of imprisonment in corrective—labor camps with dis—
enfranchisement for five additional years.

The pale Vlasov smiled wryly, and even at that point words
did not fail him:

"It is strange. I was condemned for lack of faith in the victory
of socialism in our country. But can even Kalinin himself believe
in it if he thinks camps will still be needed in our country twenty
years from now?"

At the time it seemed quite inconceivable: after twenty years.
Strangely, they were still needed even after thirty.
