590 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

frowned and filled in "nuclear physicist." I had never been a nu—
clear physicist in my life, and what I knew of the field I had
heard in the university before the war—just a little bit, the names
of the atomic particles and their parameters. And I had decided
to write down "nuclear physicist." This was in 1946. The atom
bomb was desperately needed. But I didn‘t assign any importance
to that Gulag registration card and, in fact, forgot about it.

There was a vague, unverified legend, unconfirmed by any—
body, that you might nevertheless hear in camp: that some—
where in this Archipelago were tiny paradise islands. No one had
seen them. No one had been there. Whoever had, kept silent
about them and never let on. On those islands, they said, flowed
rivers of milk and honey, and eggs and sour cream were the least
of what they fed you; things were neat and clean, they said, and
it was always warm, and the only work was mental work—and
all of it super—supersecret.

And so it was that I got to those paradise islands myself (in
convict lingo they are called "sharashkas") and spent half my
sentence on them. It‘s to them I owe my survival, for I would
never have lived out my whole term in the camps. And it‘s to
them I owe the fact that I am writing this investigation, even
though I have not allowed them any place in this book. (I have
already written a novel about them.) And it was from one to an—
other of those islands, from the first to the second, and from the
second to the third, that I was transported on a special—convoy
basis: two jailers and I.

If the souls of those who have died sometimes hover among
us, see us, easily read in us our trivial concerns, and we fail to
see them or guess at their incorporeal presence, then that is what
a special—convoy trip is like.

You are submerged in the mass of freedom, and you push and
shove with the others in the station waiting room. You absent—
mindedly examine announcements posted there, even though they
can hardly have any relevance for you. You sit on the ancient
passenger benches, and you hear strange and insignificant con—
versations: about some husband who beats up his wife or has
left her; and some mother—in—law who, for some reason, does not
get along with her daughter—in—law; how neighbors in communal
apartments make personal use of the electric outlets in the corri—
