472 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

Kotlas Transit Prison, but it turned out somewhat comically. He
announced that he was demanding a new interrogation, and that
he would not board the prisoner transport. They came to him on
the third day: "Get ready for the prisoner transport." "You don‘t
have the right. I‘m on a hunger strike!" At that point four young
toughs picked him up, carried him off, and tossed him into the
bath. After the bath, they carried him to the guardhouse. With
nothing else left to do, Rappoport stood up and went to join the
column of prisoners boarding the prisoner transport—after all,
there were dogs and bayonets at his back.

And that is how the New Type Prison defeated bourgeois
hunger strikes.

Even a strong man had no way left him to fight the prison
machine, except perhaps suicide. But is suicide really resistance?
Isn‘t it actually submission?

The SR Yekaterina Olitskaya thinks that the Trotskyites, and,
subsequently, the Communists who followed them into prison,
did a great deal to weaken the hunger strike as a weapon for
fighting back: they declared hunger strikes too easily and lifted
them too easily. She says that even the Trotskyite leader I. N.
Smirnov, after going on a hunger strike four days before their
Moscow trial, quickly surrendered and lifted it. They say that up
to 1936 the Trotskyites rejected any hunger strike against the
Soviet government on principle, and never supported SR‘s and
Social Democrats who were on hunger strikes."

Let history say how true or untrue that reproach is. However,
no one paid for hunger strikes so much and so grievously as the
Trotskyites. (We will come to their hunger strikes and their
strikes in camps in Part III.)

Excessive haste in declaring and lifting hunger strikes was
probably characteristic of impetuous temperaments which reveal
their feelings too quickly. But there were, after all, such natures,
such characters, among the old Russian revolutionaries, too, and
there were similar temperaments in Italy and France, but no—

13. But they always demanded support for themselves from the SR‘s and
Social Democrats. On a prisoner transport to Karaganda and the Kolyma in
1936, they addressed as traitors and provocateurs all those who refused to sign
their telegram to Kalinin protesting "against sending the vanguard of the
Revl?lution [i.e., themselves] to the Kolyma." (The story was told by Mako—
tinsky.)
