192 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

he did not stay there long. Comparing his stories (and later those
of others who had survived) with the well—known fact that under
the Tsar our revolutionaries escaped from exile by the hundreds
and hundreds, and more and more of them went abroad, one
comes to the conclusion that the only prisoners who did not
escape from Tsarist exile were the lazy ones—because it was so
easy. Fastenko "escaped," which is to say, he simply left his
place of exile without a passport. He went to Vladivostok, ex—
pecting to get aboard a steamer through an acquaintance there.
Somehow it did not work out. So then, still without a passport,
he calmly crossed the whole of Mother Russia on a train and went
to the Ukraine, where he had been a member of the Bolshevik
underground and where he had first been arrested. There he was
given a false passport, and he left to cross the Austrian border.
That particular step was so routine, and Fastenko felt himself
so safe from pursuit, that he was guilty of an astonishing piece
of carelessness. Having arrived at the border, and having turned
in his passport to the official there, he suddenly discovered he
could not remember his new name. What was he to do? There
were forty passengers altogether and the official had already
begun to call off their names. Fastenko thought up a solution. He
pretended to be asleep. He listened as the passports were handed
back to their owners, and he noted that the name Makarov was
called several times without anyone responding. But even at this
point he was not absolutely certain it was his name. Finally, the
dragon of the imperial regime bent down to the underground
revolutionary and politely tapped him on the shoulder: "Mr.
Makarov! Mr. Makarov! Please, here is your passport!"

Fastenko headed for Paris. There he got to know Lenin and
Lunacharsky and carried out some administrative duties at the
Party school at Longjumeau. At the same time he studied French,
looked around him, and decided that he wanted to travel farther
and see the world. Before the war he went to Canada, where he
worked for a while, and he spent some time in the United States
as well. He was astonished by the free and easy, yet solidly
established life in these countries, and he concluded that they
would never have a proletarian revolution and even that they
hardly needed one.

Then, in Russia, the long—awaited revolution came, sooner
