The Law Becomes a Man | 337

to permit the soldiers of the guard near the water—supply conduits
—"because the soldiers, out of clumsiness, might break the pipes
or machinery." On the second day of the February Revolution
he said to his workers that that was enough, the revolution was
over, and they should all go back to their jobs; the water must
flow. And during the October fighting in Moscow, he had only
one concern: to safeguard the water—supply system. His col—
leagues went on strike in answer to the Bolshevik coup d‘état
and invited him to take part in the strike with them. His reply
was: "On the operational side, please forgive me, I am not on
strike. . . . In everything else, I—well, yes, I am on strike." He
accepted money for the strikers from the strike committee, and
gave them a receipt, but he himself dashed off to get a sleeve to
repair a broken pipe.

But despite this, he was an enemy! Here‘s what ‘he had said
to one of the workers: "The Soviet regime won‘t last two weeks."
(There was a new political situation preceding the announcement
of the New Economic Policy, and in this context Krylenko could
allow himself some frank talk before the Verkhtrib: "It was not
only the spetsy who thought that way at the time. That is what
we ourselves thought more than once.")

But despite this, Oldenborger was an enemy! Just as Comrade
Lenin ‘had told us: to keep watch over the bourgeois specialists
we need a watchdog—the RKI—the Workers‘ and Peasants‘
Inspection.

They began by assigning two such watchdogs to Oldenborger
on a full—time basis. (One of them, Makarov—Zemlyansky, a
swindler and a former clerk in the water system, had been fired
"for improper conduct" and had entered the service of the RKI
"because they paid better." He got promoted to the Central
People‘s Commissariat because "the pay there was even better"—
and, from that height, he had returned to check up on his former
«chief and take hearty vengeance on the man who had wronged
him.) Then, of course, the local Party committee—that match—
less defender of the workers‘ interests—wasn‘t dozing either. And
Communists were put in charge of the water system. "Only
workers are to hold the top positions; there are to be only
Communists at leadership level; and the wisdom of this view was
confirmed by the given trial.""

5. Krylenko, op. cit.; p. 433.
