554 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

Roosevelt. And he was also certain that the West would not
countenance his, Erik‘s, imprisonment; that on the basis of in—
formation from the Kuibyshev Transit Prison the Western intel—
ligence services would immediately learn that Erik had not
drowned in the Spree River but had been imprisoned in the Soviet
Union—and either he would be ransomed or someone would be
exchanged for him. (This faith of his in the individual importance
of his own fate among other prisoners‘ fates was reminiscent of
our own well—intentioned orthodox Soviet Communists.) Not—
withstanding our heated arguments, he invited my friend and me
to Stockholm whenever we could come. ("Everyone knows us
there," he said with a tired smile. "My father virtually maintains
the Swedish King‘s whole court.") For the time being, however,
the son of the billionaire had nothing to dry himself with, and I
presented him with an extra tattered towel as a gift. And soon
they took him away on a prisoner transport."

And the movement of people was endless. Prisoners were
brought in and taken away, singly and in groups, and driven off
in prisoner transports. Appearing so businesslike on the surface,
so planned, this movement was marked by such stupidity that
one can hardly believe it.

In 1949 the Special Camps were created. And then and there,
on the basis of some summit decision, masses of women were
driven from camps in the European North and the Trans—Volga
area, through the Sverdlovsk Transit Prison, to Siberia, to Taishet,
to Ozerlag. But in 1950 someone found it convenient to assemble

7. Since that time I have asked Swedes I have met or travelers going to
Sweden how to find his family. Have they heard anything about such a missing
person? The only reply I have received is a smile. The name Andersen in
Sweden is like Ivanov in Russia—and there is no such billionaire. And it is
only now, twenty—two years later, rereading this book for the last time,
that I have suddenly realized: of course, they must have forbidden him to
give his real name! He must have been warned by Abakumov, of course, that
he would be destroyed if he did. And so he traveled through the transit prisons
in the guise of a Swedish Ivanov. And it was only through unforbidden, sec—
ondary details of his biography that he was able to leave behind in the
memories of those he encountered by chance some trace of his ruined life.
More likely he still thought it could be saved—which was only human—like
millions of other rabbits in this book. He thought he would be imprisoned for
a while and that thereupon the indignant West would free him. He did not
understand the strength of the East. And he did not understand that such a
witness as himself, who had displayed such firmness of will, unheard of in the

soft West, could never be released.
Yet perhaps he is still alive even today. (Author‘s note, 1972.)
