The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 87

gotten (even though they have never been repealed), which
supplied abundant human material for the insatiable Archipelago.
One was the Decree on Absenteeism. One was the Decree on Pro—
duction of Bad Quality Goods. Another was on samogon [moon—
shine] distilling. Its peak period was 1922—but arrests for this
were constant throughout the twenties. And the Decree on the
Punishment of Collective Farmers for Failure to Fulfill the
Obligatory Norm of Labor Days. And the Decree on the Intro—
duction of Military Discipline on Railroads, issued in April, 1943
—not at the beginning of the war, but when it had already taken
a turn for the better.

In accordance with the ancient Petrine tradition, these decrees
always put in an appearance as the most important element in all
our legislation, but without any comprehension of or reference to
the whole of our previous legislation. Learned jurists were sup—
posed to coordinate the branches of the law, but they were not
particularly energetic at it, nor particularly successful either.

This steady pulse of decrees led to a curious national pattern of
violations and crimes. One could easily recognize that neither
burglary, nor murder, nor samogon distilling, nor rape ever
seemed to occur at random intervals or in random places through—
out the country as a result of human weakness, lust, or failure to
control one‘s passions. By no means! One detected, instead, a
surprising unanimity and monotony in the crimes committed. The
entire Soviet Union would be in a turmoil of rape alone, or mur—
der alone, or samogon distilling alone, each in its turn—in sensi—
tive reaction to the latest government decree. Each particular
crime or violation seemed somehow to be playing into the hands
of the latest decree so that it would disappear from the scene that
much faster! At that precise moment, the particular crime which
had just been foreseen, and for which wise new legislation had
just provided stricter punishment, would explode simultaneously
everywhere.

The Decree on the militarization of railroads crowded the
military tribunals with the women and adolescents who did most
of the work on the railroads during the war years and who, having
received no barracks training beforehand, were those mostly in—
volved in delays and violations. The Decree on Failure to Ful—
fill the Obligatory Norm of Labor Days greatly simplified the
