Tyurzak | 479

equipment, and the monastery arrangement had to be remodeled,
but, after all, self—incarceration of a ‘body in a monastery and its
incarceration in a prison by the state serve physically similar
purposes, and therefore the buildings were always easy to adapt.
One of the buildings of the Sukhanovka Monastery was adapted
for use as a prison for long—termers. Of course, it was also neces—
sary to make up for losses from the Tsarist inventory: the con—
version of the Peter and Paul Fortress in Leningrad and of
Schliisselburg near Leningrad into museums for tourists. The
Vladimir Central Prison was expanded and added to—with a
big new building constructed under Yezhov. It was heavily
used and garnered many prisoners over those decades. We have
already mentioned how the Tobolsk Central Prison was in—
augurated, and that Verkhne—Uralsk was opened in 1925 for
continuous and abundant use. (To our misfortune, all these isola—
tors are still in use and are in operation at the moment these lines
are being written.) From Tvardovsky‘s poem "Distance Beyond
Distance" one can draw the conclusion that the Aleksandrovsk
Central Prison wasn‘t empty in Stalin‘s time either. We have less
information about the one in Orel; it is feared that it suffered
serious damage during World War II. But not far from it was
the well—equipped prison for long—termers in Dmitrovsk—Or—

lovsky.
During the twenties the prisoner‘s food was very decent in the
isolators for politicals (still called "politizakrytki"—"political

lock—ups"—by the prisoners): the lunches always included some
meat; fresh vegetables were served; milk could be bought in the
commissary. In 1931—1933 the food deteriorated sharply, but
things were no better out in freedom at that time. Both scurvy
and dizziness from lack of food were no rarity in the prisons for
politicals in those years. Later on the food improved, but it was
never the same as before. In 1947, in the Vladimir TON, I.
Korneyev was constantly hungry: one pound of bread, two pieces
of sugar, two hot dishes which were not at all filling; the only
thing available in unlimited quantities was boiling water. (It will,
of course, be said once more that this was not a typical year and
there was hunger outside in freedom, too, at the time. This was
when they generously allowed freedom to feed prison: unlimited
parcels were permitted.) The light in cells was always "rationed,"
