The Ports of the Archipelago | 535

lay there undressed. And they knocked out all the windowpanes
so as not to suffocate. Instead of the twenty men Cell 21 was
supposed to contain, there were three hundred and twenty—three!
There was water underneath the bunks, and boards were laid in
the water and people lay on those boards. That was right where
the frost poured in from the broken windows. It was like Arctic
night down under the bunks. There was no light down there either
because it was cut off by the people lying on the bunks above and
standing in the aisle. It was impossible to walk through the aisle
to the latrine tank, and people crawled along the edges of the
bunks. They didn‘t distribute rations to individuals but to units
of ten. If one of the ten died, the others shoved his corpse under
the bunks and kept it there until it started to stink. They got
the corpse‘s ration. And all that could have been endured, but
the turnkeys seemed to have been oiled with turpentine—and
they kept driving the prisoners endlessly from cell to cell, on and
on. You‘d just get yourself settled when ‘Come on, get a move
on! You‘re being moved!‘ And you‘d have to start in again trying
to find a place! And the reason for such overcrowding was that
they hadn‘t taken anyone to the bath for three months, the lice
had multiplied, and people had abscesses from the lice on their
feet and legs—and typhus too. And because of the typhus the
prison was quarantined and no prisoner transports could leave it
for four months."

"Well, fellows, the problem there wasn‘t Ivanovo, but the
year. In 1937—1938, of course, not just the zeks but the very
stones of the transit prisons were screaming in agony. Irkutsk
was no special transit prison either, but in 1938 the doctors
didn‘t even dare look into the cells but would walk down the
corridor while the turnkey shouted through the door: ‘Anyone
unconscious, come out.‘"

"In 1937, fellows, it was that way all across Siberia to the
Kolyma, and the big bottleneck was in the Sea of Okhotsk, and
in Vladivostok. The steamships could transport only thirty thou—
sand a month, and they kept driving them on and on from
Moscow without taking that into account. Well, and so a hundred
thousand of them piled up. Understand?"

"Who counted them?"

"Whoever was supposed to, counted."
