Arrest | 19

gap created by the heavy—falling word "arrest," across that
quarantine line not even a sound dared penetrate, came the un—
thinkable, magic words of the brigade commander:

"Solzhenitsyn. Come back here."

With a sharp turn I broke away from the hands of the
SMERSH men and stepped back to the brigade commander. I
had never known him very well. He had never condescended to
run—of—the—mill conversations with me. To me his face had always
conveyed an order, a command, wrath. But right now it was
illuminated in a thoughtful way. Was it from shame for his own
1nvoluntary part in this dirty business? Was it from an impulse
to rise above the pitiful subordination of a whole lifetime? Ten
days before, I had led my own reconnaissance battery almost in—
tact out of the fire pocket in which the twelve heavy guns of his
artillery battalion had been left, and now he had to renounce me
because of a piece of paper with a seal on it?

"You have . . ." he asked weightily, "a friend on the First
Ukrainian Front?"

"It‘s forbidden! You have no right!" the captain and the
major of counterintelligence shouted at the colonel. In the cor—
ner, the suite of staff officers crowded closer to each other in
fright, as if they feared to share the brigade commander‘s un—
believable rashness (the political officers among them already
preparing to present materials against him). But I had already
understood: I knew instantly I had been arrested because of my
correspondence with a school friend, and understood from what
direction to expect danger.

Zakhar Georgiyevich Travkin could have stopped right there!
But no! Continuing his attempt to expunge his part in this and
to stand erect before his own conscience, he rose from behind
his desk—he had never stood up in my presence in my former
life—and reached across the quarantine line that separated us
and gave me his hand, although he would never have reached
out his hand to me had I remained a free man. And pressing my
hand, while his whole suite stood there in mute horror, showing
that warmth that may appear in an habltually severe face, he said
fearlessly and precisely:

"I wish you happiness, Captain!"

Not only was I no longer a captain, but I had been exposed
