The Supreme Measure | 435

Krylenko explained: "What are you worrying about? Executions
have been abolished. But Shchastny is not being executed; he is
being shot." And they did shoot him.)

If we are to judge by official documents, capital punishment
was restored in all its force in June, 1918. No, it was not "re—
stored"; instead, a new era of executions was inaugurated. If
one takes the view that Latsis® is not deliberately understating
the real figures but simply lacks complete information, and that
the Revtribunals carried on approximately the same amount of
judicial work as the Cheka performed in an extrajudicial way,
one concludes that in the twenty central provinces of Russia in a
period of sixteen months (June, 1918, to October, 1919) more
than sixteen thousand persons were shot, which is to say more
than one thousand a month.* (This, incidentally, is when they
shot both Khrustalev—Nosar, the Chairman of the 1905 St. Peters—
burg Soviet—the first Russian soviet—and the artist who designed
the legendary uniform worn by the Red Army throughout the
Civil War.)

However, it may not even have been these individual execu—
tions, with or without formally pronounced death sentences,
which added up to thousands and inaugurated the new era of
executions in 1918 that stunned and froze Russia. Still more
terrible to us was the practice—initially followed by both warring
sides and, later, by the victors only—of sinking barges loaded
with uncounted, unregistered hundreds, unidentified even by a
roll call. (Naval officers in the Gulf of Finland, in the White,
Caspian, and Black seas, and, as late as 1920, hostages in Lake
Baikal.) This is outside the scope of our narrow history of courts
and trials, but it belongs to the history of morals, which is where
everything else originates as well. In all our centuries, from the
first Ryurik on, had there ever been a period of such cruelties
and so much killing as during the post—October Civil War?

We would omit from view one of the characteristic ups—and—
downs of the Russian capital—punishment story if we neglected
to mention that capital punishment was abolished in January,

3. Latsis, Dva Goda Borby na Vnutrennom Fronte, p. 75.

4. Now that we have started to make comparisons, here is another: during
the eighty years of the Inquisition‘s peak effort (1420 to 1498), in all of Spain
ten thousand persons were condemned to be burned to death at the stake—in
other words, about ten a month.
