12 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

suit of nearly half of those arrested in those epidemics would have
been confined to the provinces. A person marked for arrest by
virtue of chance circumstances, such as a neighbor‘s denuncia—
tion, could be easily replaced by another neighbor. Others, like
Andrei Pavel, who found themselves in a trap or an ambushed
apartment by accident, and who were bold enough to escape im—
mediately, before they could be questioned, were never caught
and never charged; while those who stayed behind to await justice
got a term in prison. And the overwhelming majority—almost
all—behaved just like that: without any spirit, helplessly, with a
sense of doom.

It is true, of course, that the NKVD, in the absence of the
person it wanted, would make his relatives guarantee not to leave
the area. And, of course, it was easy enough to cook up a case
against those who stayed behind to replace the one who had fled.

Universal innocence also gave rise to the universal failure to
act. Maybe they won‘t take you? Maybe it will all blow over? A.
I. Ladyzhensky was the chief teacher in a school in remote Kolo—
griv. In 1937 a peasant approached him in an open market and
passed him a message from a third person: "Aleksandr Ivanich,
get out of town, you are on the list!" But he stayed: After all, the
whole school rests on my shoulders, and their own children are
pupils here. How can they arrest me? (Several days later he was
arrested.) Not everyone was so fortunate as to understand at the
age of fourteen, as did Vanya Levitsky: "Every honest man is
sure to go to prison. Right now my papa is serving time, and
when I grow up they‘ll put me in too." (They put him in when he
was twenty—three years old.) The majority sit quietly and dare to
hope. Since you aren‘t guilty, then how can they arrest you?
It‘s a mistake! They are already dragging you along by the collar,
and you still keep on exclaiming to yourself: "It‘s a mistake!
They‘ll set things straight and let me out!" Others are being
arrested en masse, and that‘s a bothersome fact, but in those other
cases there is always some dark area: "Maybe e was guilty . . . ?"
But as for you, you are obviously innocent! You still believe that
the Organs are humanly logical institutions: they will set things
straight and let you out.

Why, then, should you run away? And how can you resist
right then? After all, you‘ll only make your situation worse; you‘ll
