522 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

edge of her bunk, right up against the grating, and called to him
quietly. (And perhaps she first sang softly. The convoy guard was
supposed to punish her for all this, but the guard itself had
settled down for the night, and there was no one in the corridor.)
The stranger heard her and, following her instructions, sat in
the same position. They were now sitting with their backs to
each other, braced against the same one—inch partition, and
speaking quietly through the grating at the outer edge of the
partition. Their heads were as close as if their lips were kissing,
but they could neither touch one another nor see each other.

Erik Arvid Andersen understood Russian tolerably well by
this time, made many mistakes when he spoke it, but, in the end,
could succeed in communicating his thoughts. He told the girl
his astonishing story (and we, too, will hear about it at the
transit prison center). She, in turn, told him the simple story
of a Moscow student who had gotten 58—10. But Arvid was
fascinated. He asked her about Soviet youth and about Soviet
life, and what he heard was not at all what he had learned
earlier in leftist Western newspapers and from his own official
visit here.

They talked all night long. And that night everything came
together for Arvid: the strange prisoners‘ car in an alien country;
the rhythmic nighttime clicking of the wheels, which always
finds an echo in our hearts; and the girl‘s melodic voice, her
whispers, her breath reaching his ear—his very ear, yet he
couldn‘t even look at her. (And for a year and a half he hadn‘t
heard a woman‘s voice.)

And for the first time, through that invisible (and probably,
and, of course, necessarily beautiful) girl, he began to see the
real Russia, and the voice of Russia told him the truth all
night long. One can learn about a country for the first time this
way too. (And in the morning he would glimpse Russia‘s dark
straw—thatched roofs through the window—to the sad whispering
of his hidden guide.)

Yes, indeed, all this is Russia: the prisoners on the tracks
refusing to voice their complaints, the girl on the other side of
the Stolypin partition, the convoy going off to sleep, pears
falling out of pockets, buried bombs, and a horse climbing to
the second floor.
