From Island to Island | 607

product partially prepared for Gulag, the prisoners were unavoid—
ably here those few days until a bit of space had been cleared
for them at Krasnaya Presnya. They had just one special privilege
here: three times a day they were allowed to go for their gruel
themselves (no grits were given out here, but the gruel was served
three times a day, and this was a merciful thing because it was
more frequent, hotter, and stuck to the ribs better). This special
privilege was allowed because there were no elevators in the
church—as there were in the rest of the prison. And the jailers
had no wish to exert themselves. The big heavy kettles had to be
carried from a long way off, across the yard, and then up a steep
flight of stairs. It was hard work, and the prisoners had very little
strength for it, but they went willingly—just to get out into the
green yard one more time and hear the birds singing.

The church cells had their own air: it held a fluttering presenti—
ment of the drafts of future transit prisons, of the winds of the
Arctic camps. In the church cells you celebrated the ritual of
getting adjusted—to the fact that your sentence had been handed
down and that it wasn‘t in the least a joke; to the fact that no
matter how cruel the new era of your life might be, your mind
must nevertheless digest and accept it. And you arrived at that
with great difficulty.

And you had no permanent cellmates here as you did in the
interrogation cells—which made the latter something like a
family. Day and night, people were brought in and taken away
singly and by tens, and as a result the prisoners kept moving
ahead along the floor and along the bunks, and it was rare to lie
next to any one neighbor for more than two nights. Once you met
an interesting person there you had to question him immediately,
because otherwise you would miss out for good and all.

And that is how I missed out on the automobile mechanic
Medvedev. When I began to talk to him, I remembered that his
name had been mentioned by the Emperor Mikhail. Yes, he had
indeed been implicated in the same case as Mikhail, because he
had been one of the first to read the "Manifesto to the Russian
People"—and had failed to write a denunciation. Medvedev had
been given an unforgivably, shamefully light sentence—three
years. And under Article 58, too, for which even five years was
considered a juvenile sentence. They had evidently decided the
