The Slave Caravans | 581

the proximity of the guard held them back (this being right
beneath the hatchway). Or it may have been that on this trip
they were saving themselves for a more important social task—to
seize control of the Aleksandrovsk Transit Prison (the one
Chekhov described) and a Sakhalin construction project (seizing
control of it, of course, not in order to construct) before the
honest thieves could; at any rate they pulled back, restricting
themselves to the threat: "On dry land we‘ll make garbage out
of you!" (The battle never took place, and no one made "garbage"
out of the boys. And at the Aleksandrovsk transit point the
bitches met with misfortune: it was already firmly held by the
honest thieves.)

In steamships to the Kolyma everything was the same as on the
barges except that everything was on a larger scale. Strange as it
seems, some of the prisoners sent to the Kolyma in several over—
age old tubs on the famous expedition led by the ice—breaker
Krasin in the spring of 1938 are still alive today. On the steamers
Dzhurma, Kulu, Nevostroi, Dneprostroi, for which the Krasin
was breaking the way through the spring ice, there were also
three decks in the cold, dirty holds, and on these decks, in addi—
tion, there were two—story bunks made out of poles. It was not
completely dark: there were some kerosene lanterns and lamps.
The prisoners were allowed up on deck in batches for fresh air
and walks. Three to four thousand prisoners were in each steamer.
The voyage took more than a week, and before it was over all
the bread brought aboard in Vladivostok got moldy and the
ration was reduced from twenty—one to fourteen ounces a day.
They also gave out fish, and as for drinking water . . . Well,
there‘s no reason to gloat here, because there were temporary
difficulties with the water. Here, in contrast to the river transports,
there were heavy seas, storms, seasickness. The exhausted, en—
feebled people vomited, and didn‘t have the strength to get up
out of their vomit, and all the floors were covered with the
nauseating mess.

There was one political incident on the voyage. The steamers
had to pass through La Pérouse Strait, very close to the Japanese
islands. And at that point the machine guns disappeared from the
watchtowers and the convoy guards changed to civilian clothes,
the hatches were battened down, and access to the decks was
forbidden. According to the ships‘ papers, foresightedly prepared
