That Spring | 241

loading rifles, vintage 1866, and only one for every five men at
that. What Lev Tolstoi is going to describe that Borodino for us?
And with one stupid slither of his greasy, stubby finger, the Great
Strategist sent 120,000 of our young men, almost as many as all
the Russian forces at Borodino, across the Strait of Kerch in
December, 1941—senselessly, and exclusively for the sake of a
sensational New Year‘s communiqué—and he turned them all
over to the Germans without a fight.

And yet, for some reason, it was not he who was the traitor,
but they.

(How easily we let ourselves be taken in by partisan labels; how
easily we agreed to regard these devoted men as—traitors! In
one of the Butyrki cells that spring, there was an old man,
Lebedev, a metallurgist, a professor in rank, and in appearance a
stalwart artisan of the last century or maybe even the century
before, from, say, the famous Demidov iron foundries. He was
broad of shoulder, broad of head, wore a Pugachev—like beard,
and the wide span of his hand could lift a 150—pound bucket.
In the cell he wore a faded gray laborer‘s smock over his under—
wear; he was slovenly and might have been an auxiliary prison
worker—until he sat down to read, and then his habitual powerful
intelligence lit up his face. The men often gathered around him.
He discussed metallurgy very little, but explained to us in his
kettledrum bass voice that Stalin was exactly the same kind of
dog as Ivan the Terrible: "Shoot!" "Strangle!" "Don‘t hesitate!"
He explained to us also that Maxim Gorky had been a slobbering
prattler, an apologist for executioners. I was very much taken
with this Lebedev. It was as though the whole Russian people
were embodied, there before my eyes, in that one thick—set torso
with that intelligent head and the arms and legs of a plowman.
He had already thought through so much! I learned from him
to understand the world! And suddenly, with a chopping gesture
of his huge hand, he thundered out that those charged under
Article 58—1b were traitors of the Motherland and must not be
forgiven. And those very same 1D‘s were piled up on the board
bunks all around. And how hurtful to them this was! The old
man was pontificating with such conviction in the name of Rus—
sia‘s peasantry and labor that they were abashed and found it hard
to defend themselves against the attack from this new direction.
I was the one to whom it fell, along with two boys charged under
