592 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

and if both ears hear, then whom should you envy? And why?
Our envy of others devours us most of all. Rub your eyes and
purify your heart—and prize above all else in the world those who
love you and who wish you well. Do not hurt them or scold
them, and never part from any of them in anger; after all, you
simply do not know: it might be your last act before your arrest,
and that will be how you are imprinted in their memory!

But the convoy guards stroke the black handles of the pistols
in their pockets. And we sit there, three in a row, sober fellows,
quiet friends.

I wipe my brow. I shut my eyes, and then I open them. And
once again I see this dream: a crowd of people unaccompanied
by guards. I remember clearly that I spent last night in a cell
and will be in a cell again tomorrow. But here comes some kind
of conductor to punch my ticket: "Your ticket!" "My friend
there has it!"

The cars are full. (Well, "full" in free people‘s terms—no
one is lying under the benches, and no one is sitting on the floor
in the aisles.) I was told to behave naturally, and I have been
behaving very naturally indeed: I noticed a seat beside a window
in the next compartment, and got up and took it. And there were
no empty seats for my guards in that compartment. They sat
where they were and kept their loving eyes on me from there.
In Perebory, the seat across the table from me was vacated, but
before my guard could get to it and sit down, a moon—faced fel—
low in a sheepskin coat and a fur cap, with a plain but strong
wooden suitcase, sat down there. I recognized his suitcase: it
was camp work, "made in the Archipelago."

"Whew!" he puffs. There was very little light, but I could
see he was red in the face and that he had had a hassle to get on
the train. And he got out a bottle: "How about a beer, comrade?"
I knew that my guards were close to a nervous breakdown in the
next compartment: I was not allowed anything alcoholic. But still
. . . I was supposed to conduct myself as naturally as possible.
And so I said carelessly: "All right, why not?" (Beer! It‘s a whole
poem! For three years I hadn‘t had even one swallow. And
tomorrow in my cell I would brag: "I got beer!") The fellow
poured it, and I drank it down with a shiver of pleasure. It was
already dark. There was no electricity in the car. This was post—
