604 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

it was there that I recited the verses of Yesenin, who had almost
but not quite been on the forbidden list before the war. And
young Bubnov, a POW, and before that, apparently, a student
who had not completed his studies, worshipfully gazed at those
reciting, his face aglow. He was not a technical specialist and he
hadn‘t come from camp, but was on his way there, and because
of the purity and forthrightness of his character he would in all
likelihood die there. People like him don‘t survive there. And
for him and for others—their fatal descent braked for the moment
—the evenings in Cell 75 were a sudden revelation of that beauti—
ful world which exists and will continue to exist but which their
own hard fate hadn‘t given them one little year of, not even one
little year of their young lives.

The swill trough dropped down and the turnkey‘s mug barked
at us: "Bed." No, even before the war, when I was studying at
two higher educational institutions at the same time and earning
my way by tutoring, and striving to write too, even then I had not
experienced such full, such heart—rending, such completely filled
days, as I did in Cell 75 that summer.

"But listen," I said to Tsarapkin, "I‘ve heard since then from
someone called Deul, a sixteen—year—old boy who got a fiver (not
on a school report card) for ‘anti—Soviet‘ propaganda. . . ."

"What, do you know him too? He was on our prisoner trans—
port to Karaganda. .. ."

". . . I heard," I continued, "that you were given work as a
laboratory assistant doing medical analyses and that Timofeyev—
Ressovsky was constantly being sent out on general—assignment
work. . .."

"Yes, and he grew very weak. He was half—dead when they
brought him from the Stolypin car here to the Butyrki. And he is
in a hospital bed here right now, and the Fourth Special De—
partment® is issuing him cream and even wine, but it‘s hard to
say whether he will ever get back on his feet again."

"Did the Fourth Special Department summon you?"

"Yes. They asked us whether we considered it might still be
possible after six months of Karaganda to start setting up our in—
stitute here, in the Fatherland."

3. The task of the Fourth Special Department of the MVD was to solve
scientific problems, using prisoners.
