From Island to Island | 593

war dislocation. One tiny candle end was burning in an ancient
lantern at the door, one for four compartments: two in front and
two behind. I talked amiably with the fellow even though we
could hardly see each other. No matter how far forward my guard
leaned, he couldn‘t hear a thing because of the clickety—clack of
the wheels. In my pocket I had a postcard addressed to my home.
And I was about to explain who I was to my simple friend across
the table and ask him to drop the card in a mailbox. Judging by
his suitcase he had been in stir himself. But he beat me to it: "You
know, I just barely managed to get some leave. They haven‘t
given me any time off for two years; it‘s a dog‘s branch of the
service." "What kind?" "Don‘t you know? I‘m an MVD man,
an asmodeus, blue shoulder boards, haven‘t you ever seen them?"
Hell! Why hadn‘t I guessed right off? Perebory was the center
for Volgolag, and he had gotten his suitcase out of the zeks, they
had made it for him for free. How all this had permeated our
life! Two MVD men, two asmodei, weren‘t enough in two com—
partments. There had to be a third. And perhaps there was also
a fourth concealed somewhere? And maybe they were in every
compartment? And maybe someone else there was traveling by
special convoy like me.

My fellow kept on whining and complaining of his fate. And
at that point, I decided to enter a somewhat mystifying demurrer.
"And what about the ones you‘re guarding, the ones who got ten
years for nothing—is it any easier for them?" He immediately
subsided and remained silent until morning: earlier, in the semi—
darkness, he had noticed that I was wearing some kind of semi—
military overcoat and field shirt. And he had thought I was simply
a soldier boy, but now the devil only knew what I might be:
Maybe I was a police agent? Maybe I was out to catch escapees?
Why was I in this particular car? And he had criticized the camps
there in my presence.

By this time the candle end in the lantern was floating but still
burning. On the third baggage shelf some youth was talking in a
pleasant voice about the war—the real war, the kind you don‘t
read about in books: he had been with a unit of field engineers
and was describing incidents that were true to life. And it was so
pleasant to realize that unvarnished truth was, despite everything,
pouring into someone‘s ears.
