The Law Matures | 411

(This murderer of millions simply could not imagine that his
superior Murderer, up top, would not, at the last moment, stand
up for him and protect him. Just as though Stalin had been sitting
right there in the hall, Yagoda confidently and insistently begged
him directly for mercy: "I appeal to you! For you I built two
great canals!" And a witness reports that at just that moment
a match flared in the shadows behind a window on the second
floor of the hall, apparently behind a muslin curtain, and, while
it lasted, the outline of a pipe could be seen. Whoever has been
in Bakhchisarai may remember that Oriental trick. The second—
floor windows in the Hall of Sessions of the State Council are
covered with iron sheets pierced by small holes, and behind them
is an unlit gallery. It is never possible to guess down in the hall
itself whether someone is up there or not. The Khan remained
invisible, and the Council always met as if in his presence.
Given Stalin‘s out—and—out Oriental character, I can readily be—
lieve that he watched the comedies in that October Hall. I cannot
imagine that he would have denied himself this spectacle, this
satisfaction. )

And, after all, our entire failure to understand derives from
our belief in the unusual nature of these people. We do not, after
all, where ordinary confessions signed by ordinary citizens are
concerned, find their reasons for denouncing themselves and
others so fulsomely baffling. We accept it as something we under—
stand: a human being is weak; a human being gives in. But we
consider Bukharin, Zinoviev, Kamenev, Pyatakov, I. N. Smirnov
to be supermen to begin with—and, in essence, our failure to
understand is due to that fact alone.

True, the directors of this dramatic production seem to have
had a harder task in selecting the performers than they‘d had in
the earlier trials of the engineers: in those trials they had forty
barrels to pick from, so to speak, whereas here the available
troupe was small. Everyone knew who the chief performers were,
and the audience wanted to see them in the roles and them only.

Yet there was a choice! The most farsighted and determined of
those who were doomed did not allow themselves to be arrested.
They committed suicide first (Skrypnik, Tomsky, Gamarnik).
It was the ones who wanted to live who allowed themselves to be
arrested. And one could certainly braid a rope from the ones
who wanted to live! But even among them some behaved differ—
