512 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

own rations functioned all the way to Novosibirsk. (It is easy to
see how this infectious experiment might have spread rapidly
through whole units of the convoy guards.)

And when they were unloaded on the ground between the
tracks in Novosibirsk, some new officer came up and asked them:
"Any complaints against the convoy?" And they were all so con—
fused that nobody answered.

The first chief of convoy had calculated accurately—this was
Russia!

Another factor which distinguishes Stolypin passengers from the
rest of the train is that they do not know where their train is going
and at what station they will disembark: after all, they don‘t have
tickets, and they don‘t read the route signs on the cars. In Moscow,
they sometimes load them on so far from the station platform that
even the Muscovites among them don‘t know which of the eight
Moscow stations they are at. For several hours the prisoners sit
all squeezed together in the stench while they wait for a switch—
ing engine. And finally it comes and takes the zak car to the al—
ready made—up train. If it is summertime, the station loudspeakers
can be heard: "Moscow to Ufa departing from Track 3.
Moscow to Tashkent still loading at Platform 1 . . ." That means
it‘s the Kazan Station, and those who know the geography of the
Archipelago are now explaining to their comrades that Vorkuta
and Pechora are out: they leave from the Yaroslavl Station; and
the Kirov and Gorky camps" are out too. They never send people
from Moscow to Byelorussia, the Ukraine, or the Caucasus any—
way. They have no room there even for their own. Let‘s listen
some more: the Ufa train has left, and ours hasn‘t moved. The
Tashkent train has started, and we‘re still here. "Moscow to
Novosibirsk departing. All those seeing passengers off, disem—
bark. . . . All passengers show their tickets. . . ." We have started.

11. Thus it is that weeds get into the harvest of fame. But are they weeds?
After all, there are no Pushkin, Gogol, or Tolstoi camps—but there are Gorky
camps, and what a nest of them too! Yes, and there is a separate mine "named
for Maxim Gorky" (twenty—five miles from Elgen in the Kolyma)! Yes, Aleksei
Maximovich Gorky . . . "with your heart and your name, comrade . . ." If the

enemy does not surrender . . . You say one reckless little word, and look—
you‘re not in literature any longer.
