22 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

line of enemy trenches, were waiting for a court—martial, whose
members, had it not been for their tank, could have come no—
where near the village.

We put out the kerosene lamp, which had already used up all
the air there was to breathe. A Judas hole the size of a postage
stamp had been cut in the door and through it came indirect
light from the corridor. Then, as if afraid that with the coming
of daylight we would have too much room in the punishment
cell, they tossed in a fifth person. He stepped in wearing a newish
Red Army tunic and a cap that was also new, and when he
stopped opposite the peephole we could see a fresh face with a
turned—up nose and red cheeks.

"Where are you from, brother? Who are you?"

"From the other side," he answered briskly. "A shhpy."

"You‘re kidding!" We were astounded. (To be a spy and to
admit it—Sheinin and the brothers Tur had never written that
kind of spy story!)

"What is there to kid about in wartime?" the young fellow
sighed reasonably. "And just how else can you get back home
from being a POW? Well, you tell me!"

He had barely begun to tell us how, some days back, the
Germans had led him through the front lines so that he could
play the spy and blow up bridges, whereupon he had gone im—
mediately to the nearest battalion headquarters to turn himself
in; but the weary, sleep—starved battalion commander hadn‘t
believed his story about being a spy and had sent him off to the
nurse to get a pill. And at that moment new impressions burst
upon us:

"Out for toilet call! Hands behind your backs!" hollered a
master sergeant hardhead as the door sprang open; he was just
built for swinging the tail of a 122—millimeter cannon.

A circle of machine gunners had been strung around the
peasant courtyard, guarding the path which was pointed out to
us and which went behind the barn. I was bursting with indigna—
tion that some ignoramus of a master sergeant dared to give
orders to us officers: "Hands behind your backs!" But the tank
officers put their hands behind them and I followed suit.

Back of the barn was a small square area in which the snow
had been all trampled down but had not yet melted. It was soiled
