82 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

aiding and abetting the enemy. However, in actual practice, it
was enough to note in the passport serial number that a per—
son had been in occupied territory. To arrest all such persons
would have been, from the economic point of view, irrational,
because it would have depopulated such enormous areas. All
that was required in order to heighten the general consciousness
was to arrest a certain percentage—of those guilty, those half—
guilty, those quarter—guilty, and those who had hung out their
footcloths to dry on the same branch as the Germans.

After all, even one percent of just one million fills up a dozen
full—blooded camps.

And dismiss the thought that honorable participation in an
underground anti—German organization would surely protect one
from being arrested in this wave. More than one case proved this.
For instance, there was the Kiev Komsomol member whom the
underground organization sent to serve in the Kiev police during
the German occupation in order to obtain inside information. The
boy kept the Komsomol honestly informed about everything,
but when our forces arrived on the scene, he got his tfenner be—
cause he couldn‘t, while serving in the police, fail to acquire some
of the enemy‘s spirit or to carry out some enemy orders.

Those who were in Europe got the stiffest punishments of all,
even though they went there as conscripted German slaves. That
was because they had seen something of European life and could
talk about it. And their stories, which made unpleasant listening
for us (except, of course, for the travel notes of sensible writers),
were especially unpleasant during the postwar years of ruin and
disorganization; not everyone, after all, was able to report that
things in Europe were hopelessly bad and that it was absolutely
impossible to live there.

That also was the reason why they sentenced the majority of
war prisoners (it was not simply because they had allowed them—
selves to be captured), particularly those POW‘s who had seen a
little more of the West than a German death camp.*" This was

42. That was not such a clear—cut decision at the start. Even in 1943 there
were certain separate waves which were like no others—like the so—called
"Africans," who bore this nickname for a long time at the Vorkuta construc—
tion projects. These were Russian war prisoners of the Germans, who had been
taken prisoner a second time when the Americans captured them from Rom—
mel‘s army in Africa (the "Hiwi"). In 1943 they were sent in Studebakers,
through Egypt, Iraq, and Iran, to their Motherland. And on a desert gulf of the
