10 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

speeches, the plays in our theaters, and women‘s fashions all
seem to have come off assembly lines, arrests can be of the most
varied kind. They take you aside in a factory corridor after you
have had your pass checked—and you‘re arrested. They take you
from a military hospital with a temperature of 102, as they did
with Ans Bernshtein, and the doctor will not raise a peep about
your arrest—just let him try! They‘ll take you right off the operat—
ing table—as they took N. M. Vorobyev, a school inspector, in
1936, in the middle of an operation for stomach ulcer—and drag
you off to a cell, as they did him, half—alive and all bloody (as
Karpunich recollects). Or, like Nadya Levitskaya, you try to get
information about your mother‘s sentence, and they give it to
you, but it turns out to be a confrontation—and your own arrest!
In the Gastronome—the fancy food store—you are invited to the
special—order department and arrested there. You are arrested by
a religious pilgrim whom you have put up for the night "for the
sake of Christ." You are arrested by a meterman who has come
to read your electric meter. You are arrested by a bicyclist who
has run into you on the street, by a railway conductor, a taxi
driver, a savings bank teller, the manager of a movie theater. Any
one of them can arrest you, and you notice the concealed maroon—
colored identification card only when it is too late.

Sometimes arrests even seem to be a game—there is so much
superfluous imagination, so much well—fed energy, invested in
them. After all, the victim would not resist anyway. Is it that the
Security agents want to justify their employment and their num—
bers? After all, it would seem enough to send notices to all the
rabbits marked for arrest, and they would show up obediently at
the designated hour and minute at the iron gates of State Security
with a bundle in their hands—ready to occupy a piece of floor in
the cell for which they were intended. And, in fact, that‘s the way
collective farmers are arrested. Who wants to go all the way to
a hut at night, with no roads to travel on? They are summoned to
the village soviet—and arrested there. Manual workers are called
into the office.

Of course, every machine has a point at which it is overloaded,
beyond which it cannot function. In the strained and overloaded
years of 1945 and 1946, when trainload after trainload poured
in from Europe, to be swallowed up immediately and sent off to
