Arrest | 17

beside the latrine bucket, my eyes had already beheld beaten—up
and sleepless men, my ears had heard the truth, and my mouth
had tasted prison gruel. So why did I keep silent? Why, in my
last minute out in the open, did I not attempt to enlighten the
hoodwinked crowd?

I kept silent, too, in the Polish city of Brodnica—but maybe
they didn‘t understand Russian there. I didn‘t call out one word
on the streets of Bialystok—but maybe it wasn‘t a matter that
concerned the Poles. I didn‘t utter a sound at the Volkovysk Sta—
tion—but there were very few people there. I walked along the
Minsk Station platform beside those same bandits as if nothing
at all were amiss—but the station was still a ruin. And now I
was leading the SMERSH men through the circular upper con—
course of the Byelorussian—Radial subway station on the Moscow
circle line, with its white—ceilinged dome and brilliant electric
lights, and opposite us two parallel escalators, thickly packed
with Muscovites, rising from below. It seemed as though they
were all looking at me! They kept coming in an endless ribbon
from down there, from the depths of ignorance—on and on
beneath the gleaming dome, reaching toward me for at least one
word of truth—so why did I keep silent?

Every man always has handy a dozen glib little reasons why
he is right not to sacrifice himself.

Some still have hopes of a favorable outcome to their case and
are afraid to ruin their chances by an outery. (For, after all, we
get no news from that other world, and we do not realize that
from the very moment of arrest our fate has almost certainly
been decided in the worst possible sense and that we cannot
make it any worse.) Others have not yet attained the mature con—
cepts on which a shout of protest to the crowd must be based.
Indeed, only a revolutionary has slogans on his lips that are
crying to be uttered aloud; and where would the uninvolved,
peaceable average man come by such slogans? He simply does
not know what to shout. And then, last of all, there is the person
whose heart is too full of emotion, whose eyes have seen too
much, for that whole ocean to pour forth in a few disconnected
cries. .

As for me, I kept silent for one further reason: because those
Muscovites thronging the steps of the escalators were too few for
