92 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

dently the fruit of his personal insanity. The majority of the
Greeks ended up in Central Asian exile; those who voiced their
discontent were thrown into political prisons.

Around 1950, to avenge the same lost war, or perhaps just to
balance those already in exile, the Greek rebels from Markos‘
army, who had been turned over to us by Bulgaria, were them—
selves shipped off to the Archipelago.

During the last years of Stalin‘s life, a wave of Jews became
noticeable. (From 1950 on they were hauled in little by little as
cosmopolites. And that was why the doctors‘ case was cooked up.
It would appear that Stalin intended to arrange a great massacre
of the Jews.)*

But this became the first plan of his life to fail. God told him
—apparently with the help of human hands—to depart from his
rib cage.

The preceding exposition should have made it clear, one
would think, that in the removal of millions and in the populating
of Gulag, consistent, cold—blooded planning and never—weakening
persistence were at work.

That we never did have any empty prisons, merely prisons
which were full or prisons which were very, very overcrowded.

And that while you occupied yourself to your heart‘s content
studying the safe secrets of the atomic nucleus, researching the
influence of Heidegger on Sartre, or collecting Picasso reproduc—
tions; while you rode off in your railroad sleeping compartment
to vacation resorts, or finished building your country house near
Moscow—the Black Marias rolled incessantly through the streets
and the gaybisty—the State Security men—knocked at doors and
rang doorbells.

And I think this exposition proves that the Organs always
earned their pay.

48. It has always been impossible to learn the truth about anything in our
country—now, and always, and from the beginning. But, according to Moscow
rumors, Stalin‘s plan was this: At the beginning of March the "doctor—mur—
derers" were to be hanged on Red Square. The aroused patriots, spurred on,
naturally, by instructors, were to rush into an anti—Jewish pogrom. At this
point the government—and here Stalin‘s character can be divined, can it not?
—would intervene generously to save the Jews from the wrath of the people,
and that same night would remove them from Moscow to the Far East and
Siberia—where barracks had already been prepared for them.
