The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 47

——

In 1928 in Moscow the big Shakhty case came to trial—big in
terms of the publicity it was given, in the startling confessions
and self—flagellation of the defendants (though not yet all of
them). Two years later, in September, 1930, the famine organ—
izers were tried with a great hue and cry. (They were the ones!
There they are!) There were forty—eight wreckers in the food
industry. At the end of 1930, the trial of the Promparty was put
on with even greater fanfare. It had been faultlessly rehearsed.
In this case every single defendant took upon himself the blame
for every kind of filthy rubbish—and then, like a monument un—
veiled, there arose before the eyes of the workers the grandiose,
cunningly contrived skein in which all the separate wrecking cases
previously exposed were tied into one diabolical knot along with
Milyukov, Ryabushinsky, Deterding, and Poincaré.

As we begin to understand our judicial practices, we realize
now that the public trials were only the surface indications of the
mole‘s tunnel, and that all the main digging lay beneath the sur—
face. At these trials only a small number of those arrested were
produced in court—only those who agreed to the unnatural prac—
tice of accusing themselves and others in the hope of getting off
more easily. The majority of the engineers, who had the courage
and intelligence to reject and refute the interrogators‘ stupidities,
were tried out of earshot. But even though they did not confess,
they got the same temners from the Collegium of the GPU.

The waves flowed underground through the pipes; they pro—
vided sewage disposal for the life flowering on the surface.

It was precisely at this moment that an important step was
taken toward universal participation in sewage disposal, universal
distribution of responsibility for it. Those who had not yet been
swept bodily down the sewer hatches, who had not yet been
carried through the pipes to the Archipelago, had to march up
above, carrying banners praising the trials, and rejoicing at the
judicial reprisals. (And this was very farsighted! Decades would
pass, and history would have its eyes opened, but the interroga—
tors, judges, and prosecutors would turn out to be no more guilty
than you and I, fellow citizens! The reason we possess our worthy
gray heads is that in our time we worthily voted "for.")

Stalin carried out the first such effort in connection with the
