The Bluecaps | 161

to pass our exams as a result. Twenty—year—olds, we marched in
the ranks of those born the year the Revolution took place, and
because we were the same age as the Revolution, the brightest of
futures lay ahead.

It would be hard to identify the exact source of that inner
intuition, not founded on rational argument, which prompted our
refusal to enter the NKVD schools. It certainly didn‘t derive from
the lectures on historical materialism we listened to: it was clear
from them that the struggle against the internal enemy was a
crucial battlefront, and to share in it was an honorable task. Our
decision even ran counter to our material interests: at that time
the provincial university we attended could not promise us any—
thing more than the chance to teach in a rural school in a remote
area for miserly wages. The NKVD school dangled before us
special rations and double or triple pay. Our feelings could not be
put into words—and even if we had found the words, fear would
have prevented our speaking them aloud to one another. It was
not our minds that resisted but something inside our breasts. Peo—
ple can shout at you from all sides: "You must!" And your own
head can be saying also: "You must!" But inside your breast there
is a sense of revulsion, repudiation. I don‘t want to. It makes me
feel sick. Do what you want without me; I want no part of it.

This came from very far back, quite likely as far back as
Lermontov, from those decades of Russian life when frankly and
openly there was no worse and no more vile branch of the service
for a decent person than that of the gendarmerie. No, it went back
even further. Without even knowing it ourselves, we were ran—
somed by the small change in copper that was left from the golden
coins our great—grandfathers had expended, at a time when moral—
ity was not considered relative and when the distinction between
good and evil was very simply perceived by the heart.

Still, some of us were recruited at that time, and I think that
if they had really put the pressure on, they could have broken
everybody‘s resistance. So I would like to imagine: if, by the time
war broke out, I had already been wearing an NKVD officer‘s
insignia on my blue tabs, what would I have become? Nowadays,
of course, I can console myself by saying that my heart wouldn‘t
have stood it, that I would have objected and at some point
slammed the door. But later, lying on a prison bunk, I began to
