406 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

permit the defendants to reply—the same kind of pulling—all—
strings—at—once he had resorted to at the trial of the Promparty.
They all spoke up, and they all defended the methods of the
GPU against the Menshevik Central Committee.

But what does Yakubovich remember today about his "reply"
and his last speech? He recalls that he not only spoke as befitted
his promise to Krylenko, but that instead of simply getting to his
feet, he was seized and lifted up—like a chip on a wave—by a
surge of anger and oratory. Anger against whom? After having
learned what torture meant, and attempting suicide and coming
close to death more than once, he was at this point in a real,
honest—to—God rage. But not at the prosecutor or the GPU! Oh,
no! At the Foreign Delegation of the Mensheviks!!! Now there‘s
a psychological switch for you! There they sat, unscrupulous and
smug, in security and comfort—for even the poverty of émigré
life was, of course, comfort in comparison with the Lubyanka.
And how could they refuse to pity those who were on trial, their
torture and suffering? How could they so impudently dissociate
themselves from them and deliver these unfortunates over to their
fate? (The reply Yakubovich delivered was powerful, and the
people who had cooked up the trial were delighted.)

Even when he was describing this in 1967, Yakubovich shook
with rage at the Foreign Delegation, at their betrayal, their
repudiation, their treason to the socialist Revolution—exactly
as he had reproached them in 1917.

I did not have the stenographic record of the trial at the time.
Later I found it and was astonished. Yakubovich‘s memory—so
precise in every little detail, every date, every name—had in
this instance betrayed him. He had, after all, said at the trial that
the Foreign Delegation, on orders from the Second International,
had instructed them to carry out wrecking activities. He no longer
remembered this. The foreign Mensheviks‘ statement was neither
unscrupulous nor smug. They had indeed pified the unfortunate
victims of the trial but did point out that they had not been
Mensheviks for a long time—which was quite true. What was it,
then, that made Yakubovich so unalterably and sincerely angry?
And exactly how could the Foreign Delegation not have con—
signed the defendants to their fate?

We like to take our anger out on those who are weaker, those
