The Interrogation | 141

on violations of legal rights. And it certainly wasn‘t up to Lieu—
tenant Colonel Kotov and me to reverse that whole process.

Anyway, all the prosecutors of any rank at all held their posi—
tions with the approval of that very same State Security which . . .
they were supposed to check up on.

His own wilted state, his lack of combativeness, and his fatigue
from all those endless stupid cases were somehow transmitted to
me. So I didn‘t raise questions of truth with him. I requested only
that one too obvious stupidity be corrected: two of us had been
indicted in the same case, but our interrogations were conducted
in different places—mine in Moscow and my friend‘s at the front.
Therefore I was processed singly, yet charged under Section 11—
in other words, as a group, an organization. As persuasively as
possible, I requested him to cancel this additional charge under
Section 11.

He leafed through the case for another five minutes, sighed,
spread out his hands, and said:

"What‘s there to say? One person is a person and two persons
are . . . people."

But one person and a half—is that an organization?

And he pushed the button for them to come and take me away.

Soon after that, late one evening in late May, in that same
office with a sculptured bronze clock on the marble mantel, my
interrogator summoned me for a "206" procedure. This was, in
accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Proce—
dure, the defendant‘s review of the case before his final signa—
ture. Not doubting for one moment that I would sign, the inter—
rogator was already seated, writing the conclusion of the indict—
ment.

I opened the cover of the thick file, and there, on the inside of
the cover in printed text, I read an astonishing statement. It
turned out that during the interrogation I had had the right to
make written complaints against anything improper in its con—
duct, and that the interrogator was obliged to staple these com—
plaints into my record! During the interrogation! Not at its end.

Alas, not one of the thousands with whom I was later im—
prisoned had been aware of this right.

I turned more pages. I saw photocopies of my own letters and
a totally distorted interpretation of their meaning by unknown
