14 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

Yevgeniya Doyarenko was arrested in 1921 and three young
Chekists were poking about her bed and through the underwear
in her chest of drawers, she was not disturbed. There was nothing
there, and they would find nothing. But all of a sudden they
touched her personal diary, which she would not have shown even
to her own mother. And these hostile young strangers reading the
words she had written was more devastating to her than the whole
Lubyanka with its bars and its cellars. It is true of many that the
outrage inflicted by arrest on their personal feelings and attach—
ments can be far, far stronger than their political beliefs or their
fear of prison. A person who is not inwardly prepared for the
use of violence against him is always weaker than the person
committing the violence.

There are a few bright and daring individuals who understand
instantly. Grigoryev, the Director of the Geological Institute of
the Academy of Sciences, barricaded himself inside and spent two
hours burning up his papers when they came to arrest him in
1948.

Sometimes the principal emotion of the person arrested is relief
and even happiness! This is another aspect of human nature. It
happened before the Revolution too: the Yekaterinodar school—
teacher Serdyukova, involved in the case of Aleksandr Ulyanov,
felt only relief when she was arrested. But this feeling was a
thousand timés stronger during epidemics of arrests when all
around you they were hauling in people like yourself and still had
not come for you; for some reason they were taking their time.
After all, that kind of exhaustion, that kind of suffering, is worse
than any kind of arrest, and not only for a person of limited cour—
age. Vasily Vlasov, a fearless Communist, whom we shall recall
more than once later on, renounced the idea of escape proposed
by his non—Party assistants, and pined away because the entire
leadership of the Kady District was arrested in 1937, and they
kept delaying and delaying his own arrest. He could only endure
the blow head on. He did endure it, and then he relaxed, and
during the first days after his arrest he felt marvelous. In 1934
the priest Father Irakly went to Alma—Ata to visit some believers
in exile there. During his absence they came three times to his
Moscow apartment to arrest him. When he returned, members
of his flock met him at the station and refused to let him go home,
