108 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

to prove our innocence when falsely accused. How can we
there? We were even glad when we succeeded in taking all the
guilt on our own shoulders."

Just as there is no classification in nature with rigid boundar—
ies, it is impossible rigidly to separate psychological methods
from physical ones. Where, for example, should we classify the
following amusement?

10. Sound effects: The accused is made to stand twenty to
twenty—five feet away and is then forced to speak more and more
loudly and to repeat everything. This is not easy for someone
already weakened to the point of exhaustion. Or two mega—
phones are constructed of rolled—up cardboard, and two inter—
rogators, coming close to the prisoner, bellow in both ears:
"Confess, you rat!" The prisoner is deafened; sometimes he actu—
ally loses his sense of hearing. But this method is uneconomical.
The fact is that the interrogators like some diversion in their
monotonous work, and so they vie in thinking up new ideas.

11. Tickling: This is also a diversion. The prisoner‘s arms and
legs are bound or held down, and then the inside of his nose is
tickled with a feather. The prisoner writhes; it feels as though
someone were drilling into his brain.

12. A cigarette is put out on the accused‘s skin (already
mentioned above).

13. Light effects involve the use of an extremely bright electric
light in the small, white—walled cell or "box" in which the ac—
cused is being held—a light which is never extinguished. (The
electricity saved by the economies of schoolchildren and house—
wives!) Your eyelids become inflamed, which is very painful. And
then in the interrogation room searchlights are again directed into
your eyes.

14. Here is another imaginative trick: On the eve of May 1,
1933, in the Khabarovsk GPU, for twelve hours—all night—
Chebotaryevy was not interrogated, no, but was simply kept in a
continual state of being led fto interrogation. "Hey, you—hands

12. Today she says: "After eleven years, during rehabilitation proceedings
they let me reread those ‘depositions,‘ and I was gripped by a feeling of spiritual
nausea. What was there to be proud of?" I myself, during the rehabilitation
period, felt the very same way on hearing excerpts from my earlier depositions.
As the saying goes: They bent me into a bow, and I became someone else. I
did not recognize myself—how could I have signed them and still think I had
not gotten off too badly?
