134 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

angry for a long time because a hundred or so Faber pencils had
been taken away from me when I was arrested. Looking back on
my interrogation from my long subsequent imprisonment, I had
no reason to be proud of it. I might have borne myself more
firmly; and in all probability I could have maneuvered more skill—
fully. But my first weeks were characterized by a mental blackout
and a slump into depression. The only reason these recollections
do not torment me with remorse is that, thanks be to God, I
avoided getting anyone else arrested. But I came close to it.
Although we were front—line officers, Nikolai V. and I, who
were involved in the same case, got ourselves into prison through
a piece of childish stupidity. He and I corresponded during the
war, between two sectors of the front; and though we knew
perfectly well that wartime censorship of correspondence was in
effect, we indulged in fairly outspoken expressions of our political
outrage and in derogatory comments about the Wisest of the
Wise, whom we labeled with the transparently obvious nick—
name of Pakhan or Ringleader of the Thieves. (When, later
on, I reported our case in various prisons, our naiveté aroused
only laughter and astonishment. Other prisoners told me that
two more such stupid jackasses couldn‘t exist. And I became
convinced of it myself. Then suddenly, one day, reading some
documents on the case of Aleksandr Ulyanov, Lenin‘s elder
brother, I learned that he and his confederates got caught in
exactly the same way—a careless exchange of letters. And that
was the only reason Alexander III didn‘t die on March 1, 1887.)°°
The office of my interrogator, I. I. Yezepov, was high—ceilinged,
spacious and bright, with an enormous window. (The Rossiya
Insurance Company had not been built with torture in mind.)
And, putting to use its seventeen feet of height, a full—length,
vertical, thirteen—foot portrait of that powerful Sovereign hung

30. A member of the group, Andreyushkin sent a frank letter to his friend
in Kharkov: "I am firmly convinced that we are going to have the most
merciless terror—and in the fairly near future too. . . . Red Terror is my hobby.
. . . I am worried about my addressee. . . . If he gets it, then I may get it too,
and that will be unfortunate because I will drag in a lot of very effective people."
It was not the first such letter he had written! And the unhurried search this
letter initiated continued for five weeks, via Kharkov, in order to discover who
in St. Petersburg had written it. Andreyushkin‘s identity was not established
until February 28. On March 1, the bomb throwers, bombs in hand, were ar—
rested on Nevsky Prospekt just before the attempted assassination.
