312 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

30,000. But the main thing was that, in consequence of female
fickleness, she changed her mind overnight, decided ‘her lawyer
wasn‘t good enough for her, and went off the next morning to
find another, the attorney Yakulov. It is not stated anywhere, but
it was evidently Yakulov who decided to turn in the interrogators.

It is of interest that all the witnesses in .this trial, beginning
with the unfortunate wife, tried to give testimony helpful to the
accused and to befuddle the prosecution. (Which would have
been impossible in a political trial!) Krylenko explained their
conduct as ‘the result of a narrow—minded, philistine attitude, be—
cause they felt like outsiders as far as the Revtribunal was con—
cerned. (And might we ourselves be so audacious as to advance
the philistine hypothesis that in the course of a year and a half
the witnesses had already learned to be afraid of the dictatorship
of the proletariat? After all, it took a lot of nerve to turn in the
interrogators of the Revtribunal. What would happen to you
after that?)

The accuser‘s line of argument is also of interest. After all,
just a month earlier the defendants had been his associates, his
comrades in arms, his assistants, They were people who had
been inalienably dedicated to the interests of the Revolution, and
one.of them, Leist, was.even "a stern accuser, capable of hurling
thunder and lightning at anyone who attacked the foundations."
What was he to say about them now? Where was he to look for
the causes of their fall? (A bribe was not enough in itself.) And,
of course, it is clear where he looked: in their pasts, in their biog—
graphies!

Declared Krylenko: "If we look closely" at this Leist, "we will
find highly interesting information." This is intriguing. Was he
an inveterate adventurer? No, but he was the son of a professor
at Moscow University! And not an ordinary professor, but one
who had survived twenty years of reaction by his indifference to
political activity! (And who, notwithstanding that reaction, had
been accepted by Krylenko as a consultant.) Was it surprising,
then, that the son turned out to be a double—dealer?

As for Podgaisky, he was the son of an official in the law courts
. . . beyond doubt one of the reactionary, pogrom—organizing
Black Hundreds; otherwise how could he have served the Tsar
for twenty years? And the son, too, had prepared for a career in
