The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 61

Article 6 of the Criminal Code, any absence of action) directed
toward the weakening of state power was considered to be
counterrevolutionary.

Broadly interpreted, this turned out to include the refusal of
a prisoner in camp to work when in a state of starvation and
exhaustion. This was a weakening of state power. And it was
punished by execution. (The execution of malingerers during
the war.)

From 1934 on, when we were given back the term Mother—
land, subsections were inserted on freason to the Motherland—
1a, 1b, 1¢c, 1d. According to these subsections, all—actions directed
against the military might of the U.S.S.R. were punishable by
execution (1b), or by ten years‘ imprisonment (1a), but the
lighter penalty was imposed only when mitigating circumstances
were present and upon civilians only.

Broadly interpreted: when our soldiers were sentenced to
only ten years for allowing themselves to be taken prisoner
(action injurious to Soviet military might), this was humani—
tarian to the point of being illegal. According to the Stalinist
code, they should all have been shot on their return home.

(Here is another example of broad interpretation. I remem—
ber well an encounter in the Butyrki in the summer of 1946.
A certain Pole had been born in Lemberg when that city was
part of the Austro—Hungarian Empire. Until World War II he
lived in his native city, by then located in Poland; then he
went to Austria, where he entered the service, and in 1945 he
was arrested there by the Russians. Since by this time Austrian
Lemberg had become Ukrainian Lvov, he received a femner
under Article 54—1a of the Ukrainian Criminal Code: i.e., for
treason to his motherland, the Ukraine! And at his interroga—
tion the poor fellow couldn‘t prove that treason to the Ukraine
had not been his purpose when he went to Vienna! And that‘s
how he conned his way into becoming a traitor.)

One important additional broadening of the section on
treason was its application "via Article 19 of the Criminal
Code"—"via intent." In other words, no treason had taken
place; but the interrogator envisioned an intention to betray—
and that was enough to justify a full term, the same as for
actual treason. True, Article 19 proposes that there be no
