68 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

The damascene steel of Article 58, first tried out in 1927, right
after it was forged, was wetted by all the waves of the following
decade, and with whistle and slash was used to the full to deal
telling blows in the law‘s attack upon the people in 1937—1938.

Here one has to make the point that the 1937 operation was
not arbitrary or accidental, but well planned well ahead of time,
and that in the first half of that year many Soviet prisons were
re—equipped. Cots were taken out of the cells and continuous one—
or two—storied board benches or bunks were built."" Old prisoners
~ claim to remember that the first blow allegedly took the form of
mass arrests, striking virtually throughout the whole country
on one single August night. (But, knowing our clumsiness, I don‘t
really believe this.) In that autumn, when people were trustingly
expecting a big, nationwide amnesty on the twentieth anniversary
of the October Revolution, Stalin, the prankster, added unheard—
of fifteen— and twenty—year prison terms to the Criminal Code."

There is hardly any neéd to repeat here what has already been
widely written, and will be written many times more, about 1937:
that a crushing blow was dealt the upper ranks of the Party, the
government, the military command, and the GPU—NKVD itself.*"
There was hardly one province of the Soviet Union in which the
first secretary of the Party Committee or the Chairman of the
Provincial Executive Committee survived. Stalin picked more
suitable people for his purposes.

Olga Chavchavadze tells how it was in Thilisi. In 1938 the
Chairman of the City Executive Committee, his first deputy, de—
partment chiefs, their assistants, all the chief accountants, all the
chief economists were arrested. New ones were appointed in their
places. Two months passed, and the arrests began again: the

33. It was similarly not by chance that the "Big House" in Leningrad was
finished in 1934, just in time for Kirov‘s asassination.

34. The twenty—five—year term was added for the thirtieth anniversary of the
Revolution in 1947.

35. These days, as we observe the Chinese Cultural Revolution at the same
stage—in the seventeenth year after its final victory—we can begin to consider
it very likely that there exists a fundamental law of historical development.
And even Stalin himself begins to seem only a blind and perfunctory executive
agent.
