From Island to Island | 611

war had ended, and we could allow ourselves the luxury of ar—
resting everyone who had been singled out: they were no longer
needed as soldiers. They said that in 1944 and 1945 a so—called
"Democratic Party" had passed through the cells of the Small
(Moscow Province) Lubyanka. According to rumor, it had
consisted of half a hundred boys, had its own statutes and its
membership cards. The eldest of them was a pupil in the tenth
grade of a Moscow school, and he was its "general secretary."
Students were also glimpsed fleetingly in the prisons during the
last year of the war. I met some here and there. I was pre—
sumably not old myself, but they at any rate were younger.

How imperceptibly all that crept up on us! While we—I, my
codefendant, and others of our age—had been fighting for four
years at the front, a whole new generation had grown up here in
the rear. And had it been very long since we ourselves had
tramped the parquet floors of the university corridors, consider—
ing ourselves the youngest and most intelligent in the whole
country and, for that matter, on earth? And then suddenly pale
youths crossed the tile floors of the prison cells to approach us
haughtily, and we learned with astonishment that we were no
longer the youngest and most intelligent—they were. But I didn‘t
take offense at this; at that point I was already happy to move
over a bit to make room. I knew so very well their passion for
arguing with everyone, for finding out everything, I understood
their pride in having chosen a worthy lot and in not regretting it.
It gave me gooseflesh to hear the rustle of the prison halos hover—
ing over those self—enamored and intelligent little faces.

One month earlier, in another Butyrki cell, a semihospital
cell, I had just stepped into the aisle and had still not seen any
empty place for myself—when, approaching in a way that hinted
at a verbal dispute, even at an entreaty to enter into one, came a
pale, yellowish youth, with a Jewish tenderness of face, wrapped,
despite the summer, in a threadbare soldier‘s overcoat shot full of
holes: he was chilled. His name was Boris Gammerov. He began
to question me; the conversation rolled along: on one hand, our
biographies, on the other, politics. I don‘t remember why, but I
recalled one of the prayers of the late President Roosevelt, which
had been published in our newspapers, and I expressed what
seemed to me a self—evident evaluation of it:
