First Cell, First Love | 231

find the simplicity of the workingman‘s life preserved. Khru—
shchev, who enjoyed life hugely, also became attached to Viktor
Alekseyevich, and in 1938, when he left for the Ukraine, he tried
to get him to go along. "I would have stayed with Khrushchev
forever," said Viktor Alekseyevich. But for some reason he felt
he should remain in Moscow. .

For a while in 1941, before the beginning of the war, he was
not employed in the government garage and, having no one to
protect him, he was taken into military service. But because his
health was poor, he was not‘sent to the front but to a labor bat—
talion. First they went on foot to Inza, to dig trenches and build
roads there. After his secure and prosperous life of the previous
few years he found it painful to have his nose shoved in the dirt.
He drank a full draft of grief and poverty there, and on every
side he saw not only that people had not begun to live better
before the war, but that they were deeply impoverished. Just
barely surviving himself, and released from the service because
of illness, he returned to Moscow and again managed to get him—
self a job as chauffeur for Shcherbakov,** and after that for
Sedin, People‘s Commissar of Petroleum. But Sedin embezzled
funds to the tune of 35 million and was quietly removed. And
Belov was once again out of a job driving for the leaders. He
became a chauffeur at an automobile depot, and in his spare time
he used to moonlight with his car on the road to Krasnaya Pakhra.

But his thoughts were already centered elsewhere. In 1943
he had been visiting his mother. She was doing the laundry and
had gone out to the hydrant with her pails. The door opened and
a portly stranger, an old man with a white beard, entered the
house. He crossed himself at the ikon there, looked sternly at
Belov, and said to him: "Hail, Mikhail. God gives you his bless—
ing!" Belov replied: "My name is Viktor." "But," the old man
continued, "you are destined to become Mikhail, the Emperor
of Holy Russia!" Just then Viktor‘s mother returned and half—
collapsed in fright, spilling her pails. It was the very same old
man who had come to her twenty—seven years before. He had
turned white in the meantime, but it was he. "God bless you,

22. He used to describe how the obese Shcherbakov hated to see people
around when he arrived at his Informburo, so they temporarily removed all
those who were working in the offices he had to walk through. Grunting be—

cause of his fat, he would lean down and pull back a corner of the carpet. And
the whole Informburo caught it if he found any dust there.
