542 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

Russian pens are too busy to write about it, and Russian eyes
don‘t have time to read about it. I am not joking—because only
doctors can tell us how months in such a cell will ruin a human
being‘s health for his entire life, even if he wasn‘t shot under
Yezhov and was rehabilitated under Khrushchev.)

And just to think that we had dreamed of resting and loosening
up a bit in port! After being squashed and doubled up for sev—
eral days in the Stolypin, how we had dreamed of the transit
prison‘! That we could stretch out a bit there and straighten up.
That we would be able to go to the toilet there without hurrying!
That we would drink as much water there as we wanted, and get
as much hot water for tea. That there we wouldn‘t be forced to
ransom our own bread rations from the convoy with our own
belongings. That we would be fed hot food there. And that at
last we would be taken to the bath, that we could drench our—
selves in hot water and stop itching. We had had elbows stuck into
our sides and been tossed from side to side in the Black Maria;
and they had shouted at us:; "Link arms!" "Take hold of your
heels!" But we were in good spirits anyway: it was all right, all
right, soon we would be at the transit prison! And now we were
there.

And even if some part of our dreams came true in the transit
prison, something else would foul it all up anyway.

What awaits us in the bath? You can never be sure. They begin
suddenly to shave all the women‘s hair off. (In Krasnaya Presnya,
in November, 1950.) Or a line of us naked men is clipped by
women barbers only. In the Vologda steam room, portly Aunt
Motya used to shout: "Stand up, men!" And she‘d let the whole
line have it from the steam pipe. And the Irkutsk Transit Prison
argued differently: it‘s more natural for the entire service staff in
the bath to be male and for a man to smear on the medicinal tar
ointment between the women‘s legs. Or during the winter, in the
cold soaping—up room of the Novosibirsk Transit Prison only
cold water comes from the faucets; the prisoners make up their
minds to ask higher—ups, and a captain comes, puts his own hand
unfastidiously under a faucet: "I say this water is hot, get it?"
I have already wearied of reporting that there are baths which
have no water at all, that they scorch clothes in the roaster, that
