That Spring | 271

victory in the world! It was just to frighten us that they were
holding us for the time being: so that we might remember and
take heed. Of course, there would soon be a total amnesty and
all of us would be released. Someone even swore that he had
read in a newspaper that Stalin, replying to some American
correspondent (whose name I cannot remember), said that after
the war there would be an amnesty the like of which the world
had never seen. And one of the interrogators had actually said
to someone else that there would soon be a gemeral amnesty.
(These rumors were a help to the interrogators— because they:
weakened the prisoner$s‘ will: The hell with him, let‘s sign—it
isn‘t going to be for long anyway.) .

But . . . for mercy one must have wisdom. This has been a truth
throughout our history and will remain one for a long time to
come. .

We did not heed the few sober minds among us who croaked
out that never, in a whole quarter—century, had there been an
amnesty for political prisoners—and that there never would be
one. Some cell expert among the stool pigeons leaped up with an
answer: "Yes, there was! In 1927. For the tenth anniversary of
the Revolution. All the prisons were emptied, and white flags
were flown on all of them." This astonishing vision of white
flags on the prisons—why white?—was particularly striking."*
We brushed aside those wise individuals among us who explained
‘that millions of us were imprisoned precisely because the war had
ended. We were no longer needed at the front. We were danger—
ous in the rear. And, were it not for us, not one brick would ever
get laid at the remote construction projects. We were too self—
absorbed even to grasp Stalin‘s simple economic calculations—
let alone his malice. Just who thi§ year, after being demobilized,
would want to leave his family and home and go off to the
Kolyma, to Vorkuta, to Siberia, where there were neither roads

16. Vyshinsky, Otf Tyurem k Vospitateinym Uchrezhdeniyam, p. 396,
presents the figures. In the 1927 amnesty, 7.3 percent of the prisoners were
amnestied. This is a credible figure. Pretty poor for a tenth anniversary.
Among the political prisoners, women with children were freed and those who
had only a few months left to serve. In the Verkhne—Uralsk Prison Isolator,
for example, twelve out of the two hundred prisoners there were released.
But, in the middle of it, they regretted even this wretched amnesty and began ©
to block it: they delayed some releases, and some people who were freed were
given a "minus" restriction instead of full freedom to go where they pleased.
