176 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

with anger here. We do not hesitate to devote to the subject page
after newspaper page and hour after hour of radio time. We even
stay after work to attend protest meetings and vote: "Too few!
Eighty—six thousand are too few. And twenty years is too little!
It must go on and on."

And during the same period, in our own country (according
to the reports of the Military Collegium of the Supreme Court)
about ten men have been convicted.

What takes place beyond the Oder and the Rhine gets us all
worked up. What goes on in the environs of Moscow and behind
the green fences near Sochi, or the fact that the murderers of our
husbands and fathers ride through our streets and we make way
for them as they pass, doesn‘t get us worked up at all, doesn‘t
touch us. That would be "digging up the past."

Meanwhile, if we translate 86,000 West Germans into our own
terms, on the basis of comparative population figures, it would
become one—quarter of a million.

But in a quarter—century we have not tracked down anyone.
We have not brought anyone to trial. It is their wounds we are
afraid to reopen. And as a symbol of them all, the smug and
stupid Molotov lives on at Granovsky No. 3, a man who has
learned nothing at all, even now, though he is saturated with
our blood and nobly crosses the sidewalk to seat himself in his
long, wide automobile.

Here is a riddle not for us contemporaries to figure out: Why
is Germany allowed to punish its evildoers and Russia is not?
What kind of disastrous path lies ahead of us if we do not have
the chance to purge ourselves of that putrefaction rotting inside
our body? What, then, can Russia teach the world?

In the German trials an astonishing phenomenon takes place
from time to time. The defendant clasps his head in his hands,
refuses to make any defense, and from then on asks no conces—
sions from the court. He says that the presentation of his crimes,
revived and once again confronting him, has filled him with
revulsion and he no longer wants to live.

That is the ultimate height a trial can attain: when evil is so
utterly condemned that even the criminal is revolted by it.

A country which has condemned evil 86,000 times from the
rostrum of a court and irrevocably condemned it in literature
