The Bluecaps | 151

power for you! She gives you the full details. If you want, she‘ll
draw a picture for you. If you want, she‘ll demonstrate with her
body. She has no way out. In your hands you hold the punish—
ment cell and her prison term.

And if you have asked for a stenographer‘® to take down the
questions and answers, and they send in a pretty one, you can
shove your paw down into her bosom right in front of the boy
being interrogated."* He‘s not a human being after all, and there
is no reason to feel shy in his presence.

In fact, there‘s no reason for you to feel shy with anyone. And
if you like the broads—and who doesn‘t?—you‘d be a fool not
to make use of your position. Some will be drawn to you because
of your power, and others will give in out of fear. So you‘ve met
a girl somewhere and she‘s caught your eye? She‘ll belong to you,
never fear; she can‘t get away! Someone else‘s wife has caught
your eye? She‘ll be yours too! Because, after all, there‘s no prob—
lem about removing the husband."" No, indeed! To know what it
meant to be a bluecap one had to experience it! Anything you
saw was yours! Any apartment you looked at was yours! Any
woman was yours! Any enemy was struck from your path! The

10. Interrogator Pokhilko, Kemerovo State Security Administration.

11. The schoolboy Misha B.

12. For a long time I‘ve been hanging on to a theme for a story to be called
"The Spoiled Wife." But it looks as though I will never get the chance to write it,
so here it is. In a certain Far Eastern aviation unit before the Korean War, a
certain lieutenant colonel returned from an assignment to find his wife in a
hospital. The doctors did not hide the truth from him: her sexual organs had
been injured by perverted sexual practices. The lieutenant colonel got in to see
his wife and wrung from her the admission that the man responsible was the
osobist in their unit, a senior lieutenant. (It would seem, by the way, that this
incident had not occurred without some cooperation on her part.) In a rage
the lieutenant colonel ran to the osobist‘s office, took out his pistol, and
threatened to kill him. But the senior lieutenant very quickly forced him to
back down and leave the office defeated and pitiful. He threatened to send the
lieutenant colonel to rot in the most horrible of camps, where he‘d pray to be
released from life without further torment, and he ordered him to take his wife
back just as he found her—with an injury that was to some extent incurable—
and to live with her, not to dare get a divorce, and not to dare complain. And
all this was the price for not being arrested! The lieutenant colonel did just as
he was ordered. (I was told the story by the osobist‘s chauffeur.)

There must have been many such cases, because the abuse of power was par—
ticularly attractive in this area. In 1944, another gaybist—State Security officer
—forced the daughter of an army general to marry him by threatening to arrest
her father. The girl had a fiancé, but to save her father she married the gaybist.
She kept a diary during her brief marriage, gave it to her true love, and then
committed suicide.
