304 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

scripted by main force, but in the barracks he refused to take
up arms:or undergo training. The enraged Political Commissar of
the unit turned him over to the Cheka, saying: "He does not
recognize the Soviet government." There was an interrogation.
Three Chekists sat behind the desk, each with a Naguan revolver
in front of him. "We have seen heroes like you before. You‘ll be
on your knees to us in a minute! Either agree to fight immediately,.
or we‘ll shoot you!" But Ye———v was firm. He couldn‘t fight.
He was a believer in free Christianity. And his case was sent to
the Revtribunal.

It was an open session, with a hundred spectators in the hall.
There was a polite elderly defense lawyer.. The learned "accuser"
—the term "prosecutor" was forbidden until 1922—was Nikol—
sky, another old jurist. One of the members of the Revtribunal—
a juror—tried to elicit the views of the accused. (How can
you, a representative of the working people, share the opinions
of the aristocrat Count Tolstoi?) But the presiding judge in—
terrupted the questioning and refused to permit it to continue.
There was a quarrel.

Juror: "You do not want to kill people, and you try to persuade
others to refrain from killing. But the Whites began the war, and
you are preventing us from defending .ourselves. We will send you
to Kolchak, and you can preach your nonresistance there!"

Ye v: "I will go wherever you send me."

Accuser: "This tribunal is not supposed to concern itself with
any nondescript criminal actions but only with those which are
counterrevolutionary. In view of the nature of this crime, I de—
mand that the case be turned over to a people‘s court."

Presiding Judge: "Ha! Actions! What a pettifogger you are!:
We are guided not by the laws but by our revolutionary con—
science!"

Accuser: "I insist that you include my demand in the rec—
ord."

‘Defense Attorney: "I support the accuser. The case should
be heard in an ordinary court."

Presiding Judge: "There‘s an old fool for you! Where did they
manage to find him?"

Defense Attorney: "I have been a practicing lawyer for forty
years and this is the first time I have heard such an insult. Enter
it in the record."

 
