The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 59

wavelets always got lost; they were little heard of, but they, too,
kept flowing on and on:

e There were Schutzbiindlers who had lost the class battles
in Vienna and had come to the Fatherland of the world pro—
letariat for refuge.

e There were Esperantists—a harmful group which Stalin
undertook to smoke out during the years when Hitler was
doing the same thing.

e There were the unliquidated remnants of the Free Philo—
sophic Society—illegal philosophical circles.

e There were teachers who disagreed with the advanced
laboratory—team system of instruction. (In 1933, for instance,
Natalya Ivanovna Bugayenko was arrested by the Rostov GPU
—but in the third month of her interrogation, a government
decree suddenly announced that the system was a faulty one.
And she was let go.)

e There were employees of the Political Red Cross, which,
through the efforts of Yekaterina Peshkova, was still defending
its existence.

e There were mountain tribes of the North Caucasus who
were arrested for their 1935 revolt. And non—Russian nationali—
ties kept rolling in from one area, then another. (On the
Volga Canal construction site newspapers were published in
four national languages: Tatar, Turkish, Uzbek, and Kazakh.
And, of course, there were readers to read them!)

e There were once again believers, who this time were
unwilling to work on Sundays. (They had introduced the five—
and the six—day week.) And there were collective farmers sent
up for sabotage because they refused to work on religious feast
days, as had been their custom in the era of individual farms.

e And, always, there were those who refused to become
NKVD informers. (Among them were priests who refused to
violate the secrecy of the confessional, for the Organs had very
quickly discovered how useful it was to learn the content of
confessions—the only use they found for religion.)

e And members of non—Orthodox sects were arrested on an
ever—wider scale.

e And the Big Solitaire game with the socialists went on
and on.
