From Island to Island | 609

particularly difficult to work here because everyone suspected
everyone else. And, he now concluded, he had worked here not at
all badly. He had spent several prewar years in Nikolayev and,
it appears, had arranged for the Rumanian armies to capture a
shipyard intact. Subsequently he had been at the Stalingrad
Tractor Factory, and after that at the Urals Heavy Machinery
Factory. In the course of collecting trade—union dues he had
entered the office of the chief of a major division of the plant, had
shut the door behind him, and his idiotic smile had promptly left
his face, and that saber—sharp cutting expression had appeared:
"Ponomaryev! [And Ponomaryev was using an altogether different
name at the Urals Heavy Machinery Factory.] We have been
keeping track of you from Stalingrad on. You left your job there.
[He had been some kind of bigwig at the Stalingrad Tractor
Factory.] And you have set yourself up here under an assumed
name. You can choose—to be shot by your own people or to
work with us." Ponomaryev chose to work with them, and that
indeed was very much in the style of those supersuccessful pigs.
The lieutenant supervised his work until he himself was trans—
ferred to the jurisdiction of the German intelligence officer resi—
dent in Moscow, who sent him to Podolsk to work at his specialty.
As Vladimirescu explained to me, intelligence officers and sa—
boteurs are given an all—round training, but each of them has his
own narrow area of specialization. And Vladimirescu‘s special
field was cutting the main cord of a parachute on the inside. In
Podolsk he was met at the parachute warehouse by the chief of
the warehouse guard (who was it? what kind of person was he?),
who at night let Vladimirescu into the warehouse for eight hours.
Climbing up to the piles of parachutes on his ladder and manag—
ing not to disturb the piles, Vladimirescu pulled out the braided
main support—cord and, with special scissors, cut four—fifths of the
way through it, leaving one—fifth intact, so that it would break in
the air. Vladimirescu had studied many long years in preparation
for this one night. And now, working feverishly, in the course of
eight hours he ruined, according to his account, upwards of two
thousand parachutes (fifteen seconds per parachute?). "I de—
stroyed a whole Soviet parachute division!" His cherrylike eyes
sparkled with malice.

When he was arrested, he refused to give any testimony for
