618 | TransLator‘s NoTEs

"Gaybist," which is pronounced "gay—beest," with the accent
on the last syllable, is derived from the letters "g" and "b" stand—
ing for State Security.

Likewise "Gaybéshnik"—pronounced "gay—besh—neek," with
the accent on the second syllable.

"Emvaydéshnik"—pronounced as it is spelled here, with the
accent on the third syllable—is derived similarly from the Rus—
sian pronunciation of the letters "M" "V" "D"—for Ministry of
Internal Affairs.

"Gaypaydoshnik"—accent also on the third syllable—comes
from "G" "P" "U" or "Gaypaydo."

"Osobist"—pronounced "oh—so—beest," with accent on the last
syllable—is an officer of the Special Branch, representing State
Security, usually in a military unit—the "Oséby Otdél."

All these terms have their pungent flavor, which comes through
even to the English—speaking reader—and they have therefore
often been used as is in the text of this translation.

In the Gulag world there was one particular type of police
official who had special significance. This was the "operupolno—
mochenny"—"6per" for short. Literally rendered, this title means
"operations plenipotentiary"—the operations being Security oper—
ations, often in a forced—labor camp, where he had enormous
power deriving from the fact that he represented State Security
in an institution under the Ministry of Internal Affairs. His nick—
name among the prisoners was "Kum," which can be translated
approximately as "godfather" or "father confessor." He was in
charge of all camp stool pigeons and he had responsibility for
the political supervision of all the prisoners. Throughout this
work his title has been translated as "Security operations officer"
or more usually just "Security officer," or "Security chief."

The Russian thieves are not just plain ordinary thieves, but
constitute a whole underworld subculture which gets much atten—
tion and is well described in this book. The Russian thieves are
"vory"—meaning thieves. They are also the "blatnye" (plural);
"blatnoi" is the masculine singular form and also the adjective,
describing a thing or person attached to the underworld or to the
law or companionship of thieves.

The Russian thieves are also the "blatari" and the "urki."
They are also "tsvetnuye"—in other words "colored." And a
