In the Engine Room | 293

summoned to testify. However, after the trial, to document the
false testimony, they got Lozovsky‘s signature and that of Political
Commissar Seryegin. The questions the tribunal asked were: Did
you have a conversation with Lozovsky? What did he ask you
about? What were your answers? Naively, Chulpenyev told them.
He still couldn‘t understand what he was guilty of. "After all,
many people talk like that!" he innocently exclaimed. The tribunal
was interested: "Who? Give us their names." But Chulpenyev was
not of their breed! He had the last word. "I beg the court to give
me an assignment that will mean my death so as to assure itself
once more of my patriotism"—and, like a simplehearted warrior
of old—"Me and the person who slandered me—both of us to—
gether."

Oh, no! Our job is to kill off all those chivalrous sentiments in
the people. Lozovsky‘s duty was to hand out pills and Seryegin‘s
duty was to indoctrinate the soldiers."* Whether or not you died
wasn‘t important. What was important was that we were on guard.
The members of the military tribunal went out, had a smoke and
returned: ten years plus three years‘ disenfranchisement.

There were certainly more than ten such cases in every division
during the war. (Otherwise, the military tribunals would not have
justified the cost of maintaining them.) And how many divisions
were there in all? Let the reader count them up himself.

The sessions of the military tribunals were depressingly like one
another. The judges were depressingly faceless and emotionless
—rubber stamps. The sentences all came off the same assembly
line.

Everyone maintained a serious mien, but everyone understood
it was a farce, above all the boys of the convoy, who were the
simplest sort of fellows. At the Novosibirsk Transit Prison in 1945
they greeted the prisoners with a roll call based on cases. "So and
so! Article 58—1a, twenty—five years." The chief of the convoy
guard was curious: "What did you get it for?" "For nothing at
all." "You‘re lying. The sentence for nothing at all is ten years."

When the military tribunals were under pressure, their "ses—
sions" lasted one minute—the time it took them to go out and
come in again. When their working day went on for sixteen con—

11. Viktor Andreyevich Seryegin lives in Moscow today and works in a
Consumer Service Combine attached to the Moscow Soviet. He lives well.
