The Bluecaps | 175

has been crossed.) You can cool oxygen to 100 degrees below
zero Centigrade and exert as much pressure as you want; it does
not yield, but remains a gas. But as soon as minus 183 degrees is
reached, it liquefies and begins to flow.

Evidently evildoing also has a threshold magnitude. Yes, a
human being hesitates and bobs back and forth between good
and evil all his life. He slips, falls back, clambers up, repents,
things begin to darken again. But just so long as the threshold of
evildoing is not crossed, the possibility of returning remains, and
he himself is still within reach of our hope. But when, through
the density of evil actions, the result either of their own extreme
degree or of the absoluteness of his power, he suddenly crosses
that threshold, he has left humanity behind, and without, perhaps,
the possibility of return.

From the most ancient times justice has been a two—part concept:
virtue triumphs, and vice is punished.

We have been fortunate enough to live to a time when virtue,
though it does not triumph, is nonetheless not always tormented
by attack dogs. Beaten down, sickly, virtue has now been allowed
to enter in all its tatters and sit in the corner, as long as it doesn‘t
raise its voice.

However, no one dares say a word about vice. Yes, they did
mock virtue, but there was no vice in that. Yes, so—and—so many
millions did get mowed down—but no one was to blame for it.
And if someone pipes up: "What about those who . . ." the answer
comes from all sides, reproachfully and amicably at first: "What
are you talking about, comrade! Why open old wounds?"*"
Then they go after you with an oaken club: "Shut up! Haven‘t
you had enough yet? You think you‘ve been rehabilitated!"

In that same period, by 1966, eighty—six thousand Nazi crimi—
nals had been convicted in West Germany.*" And still we choke

21. Even in connection with One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich, the
retired bluecaps living on pensions objected because the book might reopen
the wounds of those who had been imprisoned in camp. Allegedly, they were the
ones to be protected.

22. Meanwhile, in East Germany, nothing of the sort is to be heard. Which
means that there they have been shod with new shoes; they are valued in the
service of the state.
