286 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

Others worked in the camps for months without knowing their
sentences. After this, as I. Dobryak reported, they were solemnly
lined up—and not just on any old day, but on May 1, 1938, when
the red flags were flying—and the Stalino Province Troika‘s sen—
tences were announced. (This would indicate that the OSO did
get decentralized in times of heavy load.) These sentences were
from ten to twenty years apiece. And in that same year, my former
camp foreman, Sinebryukhov, was sent off with a whole train—
load of unsentenced prisoners from Chelyabinsk to Cherepovets.
Months passed and the zeks worked away. And then one rest day
in winter (Note the days? Another advantage of the OSO), when
the frost was cracking, they were driven out into the courtyard
and lined up. A newly arrived lieutenant appeared and introduced
himself as having come to inform them of their OSO penalties.
But he turned out to be a decent sort because he squinted at
their thin footwear and at the sun‘s rays in the steaming frost and
said:

"Well anyway, men, why should you freeze out here? The OSO
gave you all ten years apiece. There are just a very, very few who
got eight. You understand? Disssperse!"

But in view of the frankly mechanical operation of the Special
Board, why have any courts at all? Why use a horsecar when
there‘s a noiseless modern streetcar available, which no one can
jump out of? Is it a matter of keeping the judges well fed?

Still, it is really quite indecent for a democratic state not to
have courts. In 1919, the Eighth Congress of the Party proclaimed
in its program: Efforts must be made to involve all the working
population in the exercise of judicial duties. It did not prove
possible to involve "all" the working population. Conducting a
trial is a delicate business. But there was no question of getting
along entirely without courts.

However, our political courts—the special collegia of provincial
courts, the military tribunals (and why, actually, should there be
military tribunals in peacetime anyway?), and all the supreme
courts too—unanimously followed the path of the OSO. They,
too, did not get stuck in the mud of public trials or in arguments
between sides.
