550 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

husbands at the transit prison—even though visits were never
allowed and they would have succeeded only in burdening him
with things. One such woman provided, in my opinion, the theme
for a monument to all wives—and even indicated the place for it.

This was in the Kuibyshev Transit Prison in 1950. The prison
was situated in a low—lying area (from which, however, the
Zhiguli Gates of the Volga River could be seen). And right above
the prison, bordering it on the east, rose a high, long, grassy hill.
It was outside the camp compound and above it; and from the in—
side and down below we couldn‘t see the approach to it. Very
rarely did anyone ever appear up there, although sometimes goats
were pastured there or children played. And one cloudy summer
day a city woman appeared on its ridge. Shading her eyes with
her hand and barely moving, she began to scan our compound
from above. At the time, three heavily populated cells were taking
their outdoor walk in three separate exercise yards—and there
in the abyss among those three hundred depersonalized ants she
hoped to catch sight of her man! Did she hope that her heart
would tell her which one he was? In all probability they had re—
fused to allow her a visit with him and so she had climbed that
hill. Everyone noticed her from the courtyards and everyone
stared at her. Down below in the hollow there was no wind, but
it was blowing hard up above. It made her long dress, her jacket,
and her long hair stream out and billow, expressing all that love
and anxiety which possessed her.

I think that a statue of such a woman, right there on that spot,
on the hill overlooking the transit prison, with her face to the
Zhiguli Gates, just as she actually stood, might explain at least
a little something to our grandchildren.©

6. After all, someday the hidden and all but lost story of our Archipelago
will be portrayed in monuments too! And I visualize, for example, one more
such project: somewhere on a high point in the Kolyma, a most enormous
Stalin, just such a size as he himself dreamed of, with mustaches many feet
long and the bared fangs of a camp commandant, one hand holding the reins
and the other wielding a knout with which to beat his team of hundreds
of people harnessed in fives and all pulling hard. This would also be a
fine sight on the edge of the Chukchi Peninsula next to the Bering Strait.
(I had written this before I read "The Bas—Relief on the Cliff." And that
means there is something to the idea. They say that on Mogutova Hill
at the Zhiguli Gates on the Volga, a mile from the camp, there used to be
an enormous oil portrait of Stalin which had been painted on the cliff for
the benefit of passing steamers.)
