438 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

However, let us return to being dispassionate and impartial
once more. Of course, the All—Russian Central Executive Com—
mittee would certainly have "completely abolished" the supreme
measure, as promised, but unfortunately what happened was that
in 1936 the Father and Teacher "completely abolished" the
All—Russian Central Executive Committee itself. And the
Supreme Soviet that succeeded it had an eighteenth—century ring.
"The supreme measure" became a punishment once again, and
ceased to be some kind of incomprehensible "social defense."
Even to the Stalinist ear the executions of 1937—1938 could
hardly fit into any framework of "defense."

What legal expert, what criminal historian, will provide us
with verified statistics for those 1937—1938 executions? Where
is that Special Archive we might be able to penetrate in order to
read the figures? There is none. There is none and there never
will be any. Therefore we dare report only those figures mentioned
in rumors that were quite fresh in 1939—1940, when they were
drifting around under the Butyrki arches, having emanated from
the high— and middle—ranking Yezhov men of the NKVD who
had been arrested and had passed through those cells not long
before. (And they really knew!) The Yezhov men said that dur—
ing those two years of 1937 and 1938 a half—million "political
prisoners" had been shot throughout the Soviet Union, and 480,—
000 blatnye—habitual thieves—in addition. (The thieves were
all shot under Article 59—3 because they constituted "a basis of
Yagoda‘s power"; and thereby the "ancient and noble companion—
ship of thieves" was pruned back.)

How improbable are these figures? Taking into consideration
that the mass executions went on not for two full years but only
for a year and a half, we would have to assume (under Article
58—in other words, the politicals alone) an average of 28,000
executions per month in that period. For the whole Soviet Union.
But at how many different locations were executions being
carried out? A figure of 150 would be very modest. (There were
more, of course. In Pskov alone, the NKVD set up torture and
execution chambers in the basements of many churches, in
former hermits‘ cells. And even in 1953 tourists were still not
allowed into these churches, on the grounds that "archives"
were kept there. The cobwebs hadn‘t been swept out for ten
