382 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

court. The appropriate actions—i.e., those imposed by bungling
higher—ups—were quite enough: carry them out and the unthinkable
plan would destroy itself. Here was their kind of wrecking: "We had
the capability of producing, say, 1,000 tons and we were ordered [in
other words, by a nonsensical plan] to produce 3,000, so we took no
steps to produce them."!4 . . .

You must admit that for an official, double—checked, spruced—up
stenographic record in those years, this is not so little.

On many occasions Krylenko drives his actors to tones of
exhaustion, thanks to the nonsense they are compelled to grind
out over and over again . . . like a bad play in which the actor
is ashamed for the dramatist, and yet has to go on and on any—
way, to keep body and soul together.

Krylenko: "Do you agree?"

Fedotov: "I agree . . . even though in general I do not
think . . ."*

Krylenko: "Do you confirm this?"

Fedotov: "Properly speaking . . . in certain portions . . . and
so to speak, in general . . . yes.""*

For the engineers (those who were still free, not yet imprisoned,
and who had to face the necessity of working cheerfully after the
defamation at the trial of their whole class), there was no way
out. They were damned if they did and damned if they didn‘t. If
they went forward, it was wrong, and if they went backward, it
was wrong too. If they hurried, they were hurrying for the pur—
pose of wrecking. If they moved methodically, it meant wrecking
by slowing down tempos. If they were painstaking in develop—
ing some branch of industry, it was intentional delay, sabotage.
And if they indulged in capricious leaps, their intention was to
produce an imbalance for the purpose of wrecking. Using capital
for repairs, improvements, or capital readiness was tying up
capital funds. And if they allowed equipment to be used until
it broke down, it was a diversionary action! (In addition, the
interrogators would get all this information out of them by sub—
jecting them to sleeplessness and punishment cells and then de—

14. Ibid., p. 204.
15. Ibid., p. 425.
16. Ibid., p. 356.
