First Cell, First Love | 223

and knowledge." They were already talking about his going
home to his family.

Only when he arrived at the Lubyanka did he realize that even
in Salamanca he would have been closer to his native Neva. He
could now await being shot, or, in any case, a sentence of cer—
tainly not less than twenty years.

So immutably does a human being surrender to the mist of the
Motherland! Just as a tooth will not stop aching until the nerve
is killed, so is it with us; we shall probably not stop responding
to the call of the Motherland until we swallow arsenic. The lotus—
eaters in the Odyssey knew of a certain lotus for that purpose. . . .

In all, Yuri spent three weeks in our cell. I argued with him
during all those weeks. I said that our Revolution was magnificent
and just; that only its 1929 distortion was terrible. He looked at
me regretfully, compressing his nervous lips: before trying our
hands at revolution, we should have exterminated the bedbugs
in this country! (Sometimes, oddly, he and Fastenko arrived at
the same conclusions, approaching them from such different be—
ginnings.) I said there had been a long period in which the
people in charge of everything important in our country had been
people of unimpeachably lofty intentions, and totally dedicated.
He said that from the very beginning they were all cut from the
same cloth as Stalin. (We agreed that Stalin was a gangster.)
T praised Gorky to the skies. What a smart man he had been!
How correct his point of view! What a great artist he was! And
Yuri parried. He was an insignificant, terribly boring personality!
He invented himself; he invented his heroes; and his books were
fabrications from beginning to end. Lev Tolstoi—he was the king
of our literature.

As a result of these daily arguments, vehement because of our
youth, he and I were never able to become really close or to
discerp and accept in each other more than we rejected.

They took him out of our cell; and since then, no matter how
often I have inquired, I have found no one who was imprisoned
with him in the Butyrki, and no one who encountered him in a
transit prison. Even the rank—and—file Vlasov men have all dis—
appeared without a trace, under the earth, most likely, and even
now some of them do not have the documents they need in order
to leave the northern wastes. But even among them, the fate of
Yuri Y. was not a rank—and—file fate.
