From Island to Island | 601

and crawled your way in. Prisoners walked through the aisle, the
floor underneath the bunks was swept maybe once a month, and
you could wash your hands only during the evening trip to the
toilet, and even then without soap—and it was thus impossible to
say that you could perceive your body as—a Divine vessel. But I
was happy! There, on the asphalt floor, under the bunks, in a dog‘s
den, with dust and crumbs from the bunks falling in our eyes, I
was absolutely happy, without any qualifications. Epicurus spoke
truly: Even the absence of variety can be sensed as satisfaction
when a variety of dissatisfactions has preceded it. After camp,
which had already seemed endless, and after a ten—hour workday,
after cold, rain, and aching back, oh, what happiness it was to lie
there for whole days on end, to sleep, and nevertheless receive a
pound and a half of bread and two hot meals a day—made from
cattle feed, or from dolphin‘s flesh. In a word, the "BuTyur"
Health Resort.

To sleep was so important! To lie there on one‘s belly, to cover
one‘s back and just to sleep. When you were asleep, you didn‘t
spend your strength nor torment your heart—and meanwhile
your sentence was passing, passing. When our life crackles and
sparks like a torch, we curse the necessity of spending eight hours
uselessly in sleep. When we have been deprived of everything,
when we have been deprived of hope, then bless you, fourteen
hours of sleep!

But they kept me in that cell two months, and I slept enough to
make up for the past year and the year ahead, and during that
time I moved forward under the bunks to the window and then
all the way back to the latrine barrel, but on the bunks this time,
and then on the bunks I moved to the archway. I was sleeping
very little by this time—I was gulping down the elixir of life and
enjoying myself. In the morning the Scientific and Technical So—
ciety, then chess, books (oh, those itinerant books, there were
only three or four for eight or ten people, and there was always
a waiting list for them), then a twenty—minute walk outdoors—a
major chord! We never refused our walk even when it was raining
heavily. And the main thing was people, people, people! Nikolai
Andreyevich Semyonov, one of the creators of the Dnieper Hy—
droelectric Dam and Power Station. His POW friend, the engineer
F. F. Karpov. Witty, caustic Viktor Kagan, a physicist. The
