314 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

C. The Case of Kosyrev—February 15, 1919

F. M. Kosyrev and his pals Libert, Rottenberg, and Solovyev
had first served on the Commission for Supply of the Eastern
Front (back before Kolchak, when the enemy forces were the
armies of the Constituent Assembly). It was discovered that
there they had found ways to siphon into their own pockets from
seventy thousand to a million rubles at a time; they rode around
on fine horses and engaged in orgies with the nurses. Their Com—
mission had acquired a house and an automobile, and their major—
domo lived it up in the Yar Restaurant. (We aren‘t accustomed
to picturing 1918 in this light, but all this was in the testimony
of the Revtribunal.)

But none of this, to be sure, was the case against them. No
charge had been brought against any of them in connection with
their activities on the Eastern Front; they had even been forgiven
all that. But wonder of wonders! Hardly had their Commission
for Supply been disbanded than all four of them, with the addition
of Nazarenko, a former Siberian tramp and convict pal of
Kosyrev in criminal hard labor, were invited to constitute . . .
the Control and Auditing Collegium of the VChK—the Cheka!

Here‘s what this Collegium was: it had plenipotentiary powers
to verify the legality of the actions of all the remaining organs of
the Cheka, the right to demand and review any case at any stage
of its processing, and to reverse the decisions of all the remaining
organs of the VChK, excepting only the Presidium of the
Cheka!""* This was no small thing. This Collegium was second—
in—command in the Cheka after the Presidium itself—it ranked
immediately below Dzerzhinsky—Uritsky—Peters—Latsis—Menzhin—
sky—Yagoda!

The way of life of this comradely group remained just what it
had been before. They didn‘t get swelled heads; they didn‘t get
carried away. With certain individuals named Maximych, Lenka,
Rafailsky, and Mariupolsky, "who had no connection at all with
the Communist Party," they set up—in private apartments and
in the Hotel Savoy—"lavish establishments where card games
with table stakes as high as a thousand rubles a throw were the
order of the day, along with heavy drinking and women." Kosyrev
acquired a rich establishment of his own (costing 70,000 rubles)

34. Ibid., p. 507.
