The Interrogation | 105

sound. They lay this way, like Moslems at prayer, until the
guard touched a shoulder and took them off to interrogation.
Another case: At the Lubyanka, Aleksandra O va refused
to give the testimony demanded of her. She was transferred to
Lefortovo. In the admitting office, a woman jailer ordered her to
undress, allegedly for a medical examination, took away her
clothes, and locked her in a "box" naked. At that point the men
jailers began to peer through the peephole and to appraise her
female attributes with loud laughs. If one were systematically to
question former prisoners, many more such examples would
certainly emerge. They all had but a single purpose: to dis—
hearten and humiliate.

6. Any method of inducing extreme confusion in the accused
might be employed. Here is how F.I.V. from Krasnogorsk, Mos—
cow Province, was interrogated. (This was reported by I. A.
P ev.) During the interrogation, the interrogator, a woman,
undressed in front of him by stages (a striptease!), all the time
continuing the interrogation as if nothing were going on. She
walked about the room and came close to him and tried to get
him to give in. Perhaps this satisfied some personal quirk in her,
but it may also have been cold—blooded calculation, an attempt
to get the accused so muddled that he would sign. And she was
in no danger. She had her pistol, and she had her alarm bell.

7. Intimidation was very widely used and very varied. It was
often accompanied by enticement and by promises which were, of
course, false. In 1924; "If you don‘t confess, you‘ll go to the
Solovetsky Islands. Anybody who confesses is turned loose." In
1944: "Which camp you‘ll be sent to depends on us. Camps are
different. We‘ve got hard—labor camps now. If you confess, you‘ll
go to an easy camp. If you‘re stubborn, you‘ll get twenty—five
years in handcuffs in the mines!" Another form of intimidation
was threatening a prisoner with a prison worse than the one he
was in. "If you keep on being stubborn, we‘ll send you to
Lefortovo" (if you are in the Lubyanka), "to Sukhanovka" (if
you are at Lefortovo). "They‘ll find another way to talk to you
there." You have already gotten used to things where you are;
the regimen seems to be not so bad; and what kind of torments
await you elsewhere? Yes, and you also have to be transported
there. . . . Should you give in?

Intimidation worked beautifully on those who had not yet

 

 
