200 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

especially agitated, he would dash about the cell like a powerful
boar who might just knock down an oak tree in his path.) He
was so accustomed to an environment in which all the leaders
were his own kind of people, in which one could always make a
deal, work things out, cover them up! He forgot that the more
success one gains, the more envy one arouses. As he found out
during his interrogation, a dossier had been accumulating against
him since way back in 1936, on the basis of an anecdote he had
carelessly told at a drunken party. More denunciations had fol—
lowed, and more testimony from agents (after all, one has to
take women to restaurants, where all types of people see you!).
Another report pointed out that he had been in no hurry to leave
Moscow in 1941, that he had been waiting for the Germans. He
had in actual fact stayed on longer than he should have, ap—
parently because of some woman. Z———v took great care to keep
his business deals clean. But he quite forgot the existence of
Article 58. Nonetheless, the avalanche might not have over—
whelmed him had he not grown overconfident and refused to
supply building materials for a certain prosecutor‘s dacha. That
was what caused his dormant case to awaken and tremble and
start rolling. (And this was one more instance of the fact that
cases begin with the material self—interest of the blueboys.)

The scope of Z———v‘s concepts of the world can be judged
by the fact that he believed there was a Canadian language.
During the course of two months in the cell, he did not read a
single book, not even a whole page, and if he did read a para—
graph, it was only to be distracted from his gloomy thoughts
about his interrogation. It was clear from his conversation that he
had read even less in freedom. He knew of Pushkin—as the hero
of bawdy stories. And of Tolstoi he knew only, in all probability,
that he was—a Deputy of the Supreme Soviet!

On the other hand, was he a one hundred percent loyal Com—
munist? Was he that same socially—conscious proletarian who
had been brought up to replace Palchinsky and von Meck and
their ilk? This was what was really surprising—he was most cer—
tainly not! We once discussed the whole course of the war with
him, and I said that from the very first moment I had never had
any doubts about our victory over the Germans. He looked at
me sharply; he did not believe me. "Come on, what are you
saying?" And then he took his head in his hands. "Oh, Sasha,
