From Island to Island | 597

I was told that he had asked to be allowed to fly in the Far North.
And now I had just learned he had been given that permission.
This was not information I needed, but I had remembered it all.
And ten days later I turned up in the same Butyrki bath box
(there are such lovely boxes in the Butyrki, with faucets and small
washtubs so as not to tie up the big bath chambers) as a certain R.
I didn‘t know this R. either, but it turned out he had been a patient
in the Butyrki hospital for half a year and was about to leave for
the Rybinsk sharashka. In another three days the prisoners in
Rybinsk, too, a closed box where zeks are cut off from all ties with
the outside world, would nevertheless learn that Makhotkin was
in Dudinka, and they would also find out where I had been sent.

Now this is the prisoners‘ telegraph system: attentiveness,
memory, chance meetings.

And this attractive man in horn—rimmed spectacles? He walked
around the cell humming Schubert in a pleasant baritone.

And youth again oppresses me,
And the way to the grave is long.

"Tsarapkin, Sergei Romanovich."

"But look here, I know you very well indeed. You‘re a biol—
ogist? A nonreturnee? From Berlin?"

"How do you know?"

"But after all, it‘s a small world! In 1946 with Nikolai Vladi—
mirovich Timofeyev—Ressovsky . . ."

Oh, what a cell that had been in 1946; The memories of it
returned. It was perhaps the most brilliant cell in all my prison
life. It was July. They had taken me from the camp to the
Butyrki on those mysterious "instructions of the Minister of In—
ternal Affairs." We arrived after lunch, but the prison was so
overloaded that the reception processing took eleven hours, and
it was not until 3 A.M. that, tired from the boxes, I was admitted
to Cell 75; Lit by two bright electric bulbs below the two domes,
the whole cell slept side by side, restless because of the stuffiness:
the hot July air couldn‘t circulate through the windows blocked
by the "muzzles." Sleepless fiies kept buzzing, and the sleepers
twitched when the flies lit on them. Some of the prisoners had put
handkerchiefs over their faces to keep the light out of their eyes.
