118 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

—because you used to tell jokes about the Leader, because you
thought there should be a choice of candidates at elections, be—
cause you went into the voting booth only in order to cross out
the name of the only candidate and would have done so except
there was no ink in the inkwell, and because there was a 16—
meter band on your radio on which you tried to catch parts of
Western broadcasts through the jamming. Your own femner has
been assured, yet your ribs have remained whole, and so far
you have not caught pneumonia. You have not sold anyone out;
and it seems to you that you have worked things out sensibly.
You have already informed your cellmates that in your opinion
your interrogation is probably coming to an end.

But lo and behold! Admiring Kis own handwriting, and with
deliberation, the interrogator beginis to fill out deposition: No: 5.
Question: Were you friendly with B? Answer: Yes. Question:
Were you frank with him about politics? Answer: No, no, I did
not trust him. Question: But you met often? Answer: Not very.
Question: What does that mean, not very? According to testi—
mony from your neighbors, he was at your house on such and
such a day, and on such and such, and on such and such just
in the past month. Was he? Answer: Maybe. Question: And it
was observed that on these occasions, as always, you did not
drink, you did not make any noise, you spoke very quietly, and
you couldn‘t be overheard even in the corridor? (Well, friends,
drink up! Break bottles! Curse at the top of your lungs! On that
basis you will be considered reliable.) Answer: Well, what of
it? Question: And you used to visit him too. And you said to him
on the phone, for example: "We spent such an interesting even—
ing." Then they saw you on the street at an intersection. You
were standing there together in the cold for half an hour, and
you both had gloomy faces and dissatisfied expressions; in fact,
they even took photographs of you during that meeting. (The
technological resources of agents, my friends, the technology of
agents!) So what did you talk about during these meetings?

What about? That‘s a leading question! Your first idea is to
say that you‘ve forgotten what you talked about. Are you really
obliged to remember? So! You‘ve forgotten your first conversa—
tion. And the second one too? And the third? And even your
interesting evening? And that time at the intersection? And your
