The Law Becomes a Man | 347

the question of surrendering, or not surrendering, church valu—
ables. Archpriest A. N. Zaozersky had surrendered all the
valuables in his own church, but he defended in principle the
Patriarch‘s appeal regarding forced requisition as sacrilege, and
he became the central personage in the trial—and would shortly
be shot. (All of which went to prove that what was important was
not to feed the starving but to make use of a convenient opportu—
nity to break the back of the church.)

On May 5 Patriarch Tikhon was summoned to the tribunal as
a witness. Even though the public was represented only by a
carefully selected audience (1922, in this respect, differing little
from 1937 and 1968), nonetheless the stamp of Old Russia was
still so deep, and the Soviet stamp was still so superficial, that on
the Patriarch‘s entrance more than half of those present rose to
receive his blessing.

Tikhon took on himself the entire blame for writing and dis—
seminating his appeal. The presiding judge of the tribunal tried
to elicit a different line of testimony from him: "But it isn‘t pos—
sible! Did you really write it in your own hand? All the lines?
You probably just signed it. And who actually wrote it? And who
were your advisers?" and then: "Why did you mention in the
appeal the persecution to which the newspapers are subjecting
you? [After—all, they are persecuting you and why should we
hear about it?] What did you want to express?"

The Patriarch: "That is something you will have to ask the
people who started the persecution: What objectives were they
pursuing?"

The Presiding Judge: "But that after all has nothing to do with
religion!"

The Patriarch: "It has historical significance."

The Presiding Judge: "Referring to the fact that the decree was
published while you were in the midst of talks with Pomgol, you
used the expression, behind your back?"

The Patriarch: "Yes."

Presiding Judge: "You therefore consider that the Soviet gov—
ernment acted incorrectly?"

A crushing argument! It will be repeated a million times more
in the nighttime offices of interrogators! And we will never answer
as simply and straightforwardly as:

The Patriarch: "Yes."
