528 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

traffic to a halt at intersections. ("So you got caught stealing?"
came the reproaches from the sidewalks. No one had yet grasped
the great plan for sewage disposal.)

But, always alert to technological trends, the Archipelago
lost no time in adopting the black ravens, more familiarly known
simply as ravens—Black Marias. These first Black Marias ap—
peared at the same time as the very first trucks on our still cob—
blestoned streets. Their suspension was poor, and it was very
rough riding in them, but then the prisoners weren‘t made of
crystal either. On the other hand, they were very tightly corked
even at that time, in 1927: there wasn‘t one little crack; and there
wasn‘t one little electric light bulb, and there wasn‘t any air to
breathe, and it was impossible to see out. And even in those days
they stood so tightly packed inside that there wasn‘t any room
left at all. And it wasn‘t that all this was intentionally planned;
there simply weren‘t enough wheels to go around.

For many years the Black Marias were steel—gray and had, so
to speak, prison written all over them. But in the biggest cities
after the war they had second thoughts and decided to paint them
bright colors and to write on the outside, "Bread" (the prisoners
were the bread of construction), or "Meat" (it would have been
more accurate to write "bones"), or even, simply, "Drink Soviet
Champagne!"

Inside, the Black Marias might consist of a simple armored
body or shell, an empty enclosure. Or perhaps there were benches
against the walls all the way around. This was in no sense a con—
venience, but the reverse: they would push in just as many
prisoners as could be inserted standing up, but in this case they
would be piled on top of each other like baggage, one bale on
another. The Black Maria might also have a box in the rear—
a narrow steel closet for one prisoner, Or it might be boxed
throughout: single closets that locked like cells along the right—
and left—hand walls, with a corridor in the middle for the turnkey.

One was hardly likely to imagine that interior like a honey—
comb when looking at that laughing maiden on the outside:
"Drink Soviet Champagne!"

They drive you into the Black Marias to the tune of the same
shouts coming from the convoy from all sides at once: "Come
on there, get a move on, quick!" And so that you shouldn‘t have
