596 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

know one another. And quite naturally when you landed in any
cell of any transit prison and listened and chatted, you‘d be cer—
tain to discover you had acquaintances in common with some of
your cellmates. (And so D., after having spent more than a year
in solitary confinement, after Sukhanovka, after Ryumin‘s beat—
ings and the hospital, could land in a Lubyanka cell and give
his name, and then and there a bright chap named F. could greet
him: "Aha, so now I know who you are!" "Where from?" D. shied
away from him. "You are mistaken." "Certainly not. You are
that very same American, Alexander D., whom the bourgeois
press lied about, saying you had been kidnaped—and TASS
denied it. I was free at the time and read about it." )

I love that moment when a newcomer is admitted to the cell for
the first time (not a novice who has only recently been arrested
and will inevitably be depressed and confused, but a veteran
zek). And I myself love to enter a new cell (nonetheless, God
grant I never have to do it again) with an unworried smile and
an expansive gesture: "Hi, brothers!" I throw my bag on the
bunks. "Well, so what‘s new this past year in Butyrki?"

We begin to get acquainted. Some fellow named Suvorov, a 58.
At first glance there‘s nothing remarkable about him, but you
probe and pry: at the Krasnoyarsk Transit Prison a certain
Makhotkin was in his cell.

"Just a moment, wasn‘t he an Arctic aviator?"

"Yes. They named . . ."

" . . . an island after him in the Taimyr Gulf. And he‘s in
prison for 58—10. So does that mean they let him go to Dudinka?"

"How do you know? Yes."

Wonderful! One more link in the biography of a man I don‘t
know. I have never met him, and perhaps I never shall. But my
efficient memory has filed away everything I know about him:
Makhotkin got a whole "quarter"—twenty—five years—but the
island named after him couldn‘t be renamed because it was on
all the maps of the world (it wasn‘t a Gulag island). They had
taken him on at the aviation sharashka in Bolshino and he was
unhappy there: an aviator among engineers, and not allowed to
fly. They split that sharashka in two, and Makhotkin got assigned
to the Taganrog half, and it seemed as though all connection with
him had been severed. In the other half of it, however, in Rybinsk,
