The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 73

just as the intelligentsia had never been overlooked in previous
waves, it was not neglected in this one. A student‘s denunciation
(and this combination of words, "student" and "denunciation,"
had ceased to sound outlandish) that a certain lecturer in a higher
educational institution kept citing Lenin and Marx frequently but
Stalin not at all was all that was needed for the lecturer not to
show up for lectures any more. And what if he cited no one? All
Leningrad Orientalists of the middle and younger generation were
arrested. The entire staff of the Institute of the North, except
for its NKVD informers, was arrested. They even went after
schoolteachers. In Sverdlovsk one case involved thirty secondary
schoolteachers and the head of the Provincial Education De—
partment, Perel."" One of the terrible accusations against them
was that they had made arrangements to have a New Year‘s tree
in order to burn down the school. And the club fell with the
reguldrity of a pendulum on the heads of the engineers—who by
this time were no longer "bourgeois" but a whole Soviet genera—
tion of engineers.

Because of an irregularity in the geological strata two mine
tunnels which mine surveyor Nikolai Merkuryevich Mikov had
calculated would meet failed to do so. He got Article 58—7—
twenty years.

Six geologists (the Kotovich group) were sentenced to ten
years under 58—7 "for intentionally concealing reserves of tin
ore in underground sites in anticipation of the arrival of the
Germans." (In other words, they had failed to find the deposits.)

On the heels of the main waves followed an additional, special
wave—of wives and the so—called "ChS" (Members of Families).
Among them were the wives of important Party leaders and also,
in certain places, Leningrad, for example, the wives of all those
who had been sentenced to "ten years without the right to cor—
respond"—in other words, those who were no longer among the
living. The "ChS," as a rule, all got eights—eight years. (Well,

37. Five of them died before trial from tortures suffered during interrogation.
Twenty—four died in camps. The thirtieth, Ivan Aristaulovich Punich, returned
after his release and rehabilitation. (Had he died, we would have known
nothing about the thirty, just as we know nothing about millions of others.)
And the many "witnesses" who testified against them are still there in Sverd—
lovsk today—prospering, occupying responsible positions, or living on as
special pensioners. Darwinian selection!
