156 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

caught in a wave were in very serious danger. (They had their own
waves!) A wave is a natural catastrophe and is even more power—
ful than the Organs themselves. In this situation, no one was going
to help anyone else lest he be drawn into the same abyss him—
self.

The possibility did exist, however, if you were well informed
and had a sharp Chekist sensitivity, of getting yourself out from
under the avalanche, even at the last minute, by proving that you
had no connection with it. Thus it was that Captain Sayenko (not
the Kharkov Chekist carpenter of 1918—1919, who was famous
for executing prisoners with his pistol, punching holes in bodies
with his saber, breaking shinbones in two, flattening heads with
weights, and branding people with hot irons,‘* but, perhaps, a rel—
ative) was weak enough to marry for love an ex—employee of the
Chinese Eastern Railroad named Kokhanskaya. And suddenly he
found out, right at the beginning of the wave, that all the Chinese
Eastern Railroad people were going to be arrested. At this time
he was head of the Security Operations Department of the Arch—
angel GPU. He acted without losing a moment. How? He arrested
his own beloved wife! And not on the basis of her being one of
the Chinese Eastern Railroad people—but on the basis of a case
he himself cooked up. Not only did he save himself, but he moved
up and became the Chief of the Tomsk Province NKVD.*

The waves were generated by the Organs‘ hidden law of self—
renewal—a small periodic ritual sacrifice so that the rest could
take on the appearance of being purified. The Organs had to
change personnel faster than the normal rate of human growth
and aging would ensure. Driven by that same implacable urgency
that forces the sturgeon to swim upriver and perish in the shallows,
to be replaced by schools of small fry, a certain number of
"schools" of gaybisty had to sacrifice themselves. This law was
easily apparent to a higher intelligence, but the bluecaps them—
selves did not want to accept the fact of its existence and make
provision for it. Yet, at the hour appointed in their stars, the
kings of the Organs, the aces of the Organs, and even the minis—
ters themselves laid their heads down beneath their own guil—
lotine.

14. Roman Gul, Dzerzhinsky. Menzthinsky—Peters—Latsis—Yagoda, Paris,
1936.

15. This, too, is a theme for a story—and how many more there are in this
field! Maybe someone will make use of them someday.
