122 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

are guilty of, And anyway, at this point your signature doesn‘t
mean that you agree with the indictment but that you‘ve read it,
that it‘s been presented to you."

All of a sudden, a new combination of letters, UPK, flashes
by on one of the pieces of paper. Your sense of caution is
aroused. What‘s the difference between the UPK and the UK——
the Criminal Code? If you‘ve been lucky enough to catch the
interrogator when he is in a good mood, he will explain it to
you: the UPK is the Code of Criminal Procedure. What? This
means that there are two distinct codes, not just one, of whose
contents you are completely ignorant even as you are being
trampled under their provisions.

Since that time ten years have passed; then fifteen. The grass
has grown thick over the grave of my youth. I served out my
term and even "eternal exile" as well. And nowhere—neither in
the "cultural education" sections of the camps, nor in district
libraries, nor—even in medium—sized cities, have I seen with my
own eyes, held in my own hands, been able to buy, obtain, or
even ask for the Code of Soviet law!*"

And of the hundreds of prisoners I knew who had gone
through interrogation and trial, and more than once too, who
had served sentences in camp and in exile, none had ever seen
the Code or held it in his hand!

It was only when both codes were thirty—five years old and on
the point of being replaced by new ones that I saw them, two
little paperback brothers, the UK or Criminal Code, and the
UPK or Code of Criminal Procedure, on a newsstand in the
Moscow subway (because they were outdated, it had been de—
cided to release them for general circulation).

I read them today touched with emotion. For example, the
UPK—the Code of Criminal Procedure:

"Article 136: The interrogator does not have the right to
extract testimony or a confession from an accused by means of
compulsion and threats." (It was as though they had foreseen
it!)

21. Those familiar with our atmosphere of suspicion will understand why it
was impossible to ask for the Code in a people‘s court—or in the District Execu—
tive Committee. Your interest in the Code would be an extraordinary phenome—

non: you must either be preparing to commit a crime or be trying to cover your
tracks.
