The Bluecaps | 153

another prisoner. (When the armies were advancing, the bluecaps
were especially irritated because they got only second pick of the
booty.) The counterintelligence officer of the Forty—ninth Army
who arrested me had a yen for my cigarette case—and it wasn‘t
even a cigarette case but a small German Army box, of a tempting
scarlet, however. And because of that piece of shit he carried out
a whole maneuver: As his first step, he omitted it from the list of
belongings that were confiscated from me. ("You can keep it.")
He thereupon ordered me to be searched again, knowing all the
time that it was all I had in my pockets. "Aha! what‘s that? Take
it away!" And to prevent my protests: "Put him in the punish—
ment cell!" (What Tsarist gendarme would have dared behave
that way toward a defender of the Fatherland?)

Every interrogator was given an allowance of a certain number
of cigarettes to encourage those willing to confess and to reward
stool pigeons. Some of them kept all the cigarettes for themselves.

Even in accounting for hours spent in interrogating, they used
to cheat. They got higher pay for night work. And we used to
note the way they wrote down more hours on the night interroga—
tions than they really spent.

Interrogator Fyodorov (Reshety Station, P. O. Box No. 235)
stole a wristwatch while searching the apartment of the free person
Korzukhin. During the Leningrad blockade Interrogator Nikolai
Fyodorovich Kruzhkov told Yelizaveta Viktorovna Strakhovich,
wife of the prisoner he was interrogating, K. I. Strakhovich: "I
want a quilt. Bring it to me!" When she replied: "All our warm
things are in the room they‘ve sealed," he went to her apart—
ment and, without breaking the State Security seal on the lock,
unscrewed the entire doorknob. "That‘s how the MGB works,"
he explained gaily. And he went in and began to collect the warm
things, shoving some crystal in his pocket at the same time. She
herself tried to get whatever she could out of the room, but he
stopped her." "That‘s enough for you!"—and he kept on raking
in the booty.

13. In 1954, although her husband, who had forgiven them everything, in—
cluding a death sentence that had been commuted, kept trying to persuade her
not to pursue the matter, this energetic and implacable woman testified against
Kruzhkov at a trial. Because this was not Kruzhkov‘s first offense, and because
the interests of the Organs had been violated, he was given a twenty—five—year
sentence. Has he really been in the jug that long?
