208 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

about the consequences. There the machinelike Lubyanka manner
would be particularly striking. He didn‘t ask:; "What‘s your
trouble?" That would take too many words, and one couldn‘t
pronounce the phrase without any inflection. He would ask curtly:
"Troubles?" And if you began to talk at too great length about
your ailment, he would cut you off. It was clear anyway. A tooth—
ache? Extract it. You could have arsenic. A filling? We don‘t
fill teeth here. (That would have required additional appoint—
ments and created a somewhat humane atmosphere.)

The prison doctor was the interrogator‘s and executioner‘s
right—hand man. The beaten prisoner would come to on the floor
only to hear the doctor‘s voice: "You can continue, the pulse is
normal." After a prisoner‘s five days and nights in a punishment
cell the doctor inspects the frozen, naked body and says: "You
can continue." If a prisoner is beaten to death, he signs the death
certificate: "Cirrhosis of the liver" or "Coronary occlusion." He
gets an urgent call to a dying prisoner in a cell and he takes his
time. And whoever behaves differently is not kept on in the
prison.""

But our stoolie was better informed about his rights. (Accord—
ing to him he had already been under interrogation eleven months.
And he was taken to interrogation only during the day.) He spoke
up and asked for an appointment with the prison chief. What, the
chief of the whole Lubyanka? Yes. His name was taken down.
(And in the evening, after taps, when the interrogators were al—
ready in their offices, he was summoned. And he returned with
some makhorka.) This was very crude, of course, but so far they
had not been able to think up anything better. It would have been
a big expense to convert entirely to microphones in the walls and
impossible to listen in on all 111 cells for whole days at a time.
Who would do it? Stool pigeons were cheaper and would continue
to be used for a long time to come. But Kramarenko had a hard
time with us. Sometimes he eavesdropped so hard that the sweat
poured from him, and we could see from his face that he didn‘t
understand what we were saying.

There was one additional right—the privilege of writing appli—
cations and petitions (which replaced freedom of the press, of
assembly, and of the ballot, all of which we had lost when we

17. Dr. F. P. Gaaz would have earned nothing extra in our country.
