216 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

plete works of Merezhkovsky. (Some people wisecracked that
they allowed us to read forbidden books because they already re—
garded us as dead. But I myself think that the Lubyanka librarians
hadn‘t the faintest concept of what they were giving us—they
were simply lazy and ignorant.)

We used to read intensively during the hours before lunch. But
it sometimes happened that a single phrase would get you going
and drive you to pace from window to door, from door to window.
And you would want to show somebody what you had read and
explain what it implied, and then an argument would get started.
It was a time for sharp arguments, as well!

I often argued with Yuri Y.

On that March morning when they led the five of us into palatial
Cell 53, they had just added a sixth prisoner to our group.

He entered, it seemed, like a spirit, and his shoes made no
noise against the floor. He entered and, not sure that he could
stay on his feet, leaned against the door frame. The bulb had
been turned off in the cell and the morning light was dim. How—
ever, the newcomer did not have his eyes wide open. He squinted,
and he kept silent.

The cloth of his military field jacket and trousers did not
identify him as coming from the Soviet, or the German, or the
Polish, or the English Army. The structure of his face was elong—
ated. There was very little Russian in it. And he was painfully
thin. And not only very thin but very tall.

We spoke to him in Russian—and he kept silent. Susi addressed
him in German—he still kept silent. Fastenko tried French and
English—with the same result. Only gradually did a smile appear
on his emaciated, yellow, half—dead face—the only such smile I
had ever seen in my life.

"Pee—eeple," he uttered weakly, as if he were coming out of a
faint, or as if he had been waiting all night long to be executed.
And he reached out his weak, emaciated hand. It held a small
bundle tied up in a rag. Our stoolie understood instantly what was
in it, threw himself on it, grabbed it, and opened it up on the table.
There was half a pound of light tobacco. He had instantly man—
