296 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

a look at any individual little tin soldier of a prisoner. In 1937,
A.D.R., an electrical engineer, was taken up to the fourth floor,
running upstairs with a convoy guard on either side of him. (In
all probability, the elevator was working, but there were so many
prisoners pouring in and out that the officials and employees
would not have been able to use the elevator if the prisoners
had been permitted to.) Meeting a convicted prisoner who had.
just left, they dashed into the court. The Military Collegium was
in such a hurry they hadn‘t sat down yet, and all three members
remained standing. Catching his breath with difficulty, for he
had been weakened by his long interrogation, R. blurted out his
full name. They muttered something, exchanged glances, and
Ulrikh—the very same, no less—proclaimed: "Twenty years!"
And they dragged R. out at a gallop and, at a gallop, dragged in
the next prisoner.

It was all like a dream. In February, 1963, I, too, got to climb
those stairs, but I was courteously accompanied by a colonel who
was also a Communist Party organizer. And in that room with
the circular colonnade, in which, they say, the Plenary Sessions
of the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R. meet—with an enormous
horseshoelike table that had another round table inside it and
seven antique chairs—seventy officials of the Military Collegium
heard me out—that same Military Collegium which once sen—
tenced Karetnikov, and R. and others and others, and so on and
so forth. And I said to them: "What a remarkable day this is!
Although I was first sentenced to camp and then to eternal exile,
I never before saw a single judge face to face. And now I see all
of you assembled here together!" (And they, rubbing their eyes
open, for the first time saw a living zek.)

But it turned out that it had not been they! Yes. They said
it had not been they. They assured me that those others were no
longer present. Some had retired honorably on pensions. A few
had been removed. (Ulrikh, the outstanding executioner of all,
had been removed, it turned out, back in Stalin‘s time, in 1950,
for, believe it or not, leniency.) Some of them—there were only
a few of these—had even been tried under Khrushchev, and, in
their role as defendants, they had threatened: "Today you are
trying us. Tomorrow we will try you. Watch out!" But like all
the starts made under Khrushchev, this effort, too, which had
