544 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

cast anchor at the transit prison and not have to go on to a mine
or to the taiga. All these work—assignment clerks, office clerks,
bookkeepers, instructors, bath attendants, barbers, stockroom
clerks, cooks, dishwashers, laundresses, tailors who repair under—
wear and linens—are permanent transit—prison residents. They
receive prison rations and are registered in cells, and they swipe
the rest of their soup and chow on their own out of the common
food pot or out of the bundles of the transit zeks. All these transit—
prison trusties regard it as certain that they will never be better
off in any camp. We arrive in their hands still not completely
plucked, and they bamboozle us to their hearts‘ content. It is they
and not the jailers who search us and our belongings here, and
before the search they suggest we turn in our money for safekeep—
ing, and they seriously write down a list—we never see the list
or the money again. "We turned in our money." "Who to?" the
officer who has arrived on the scene asks in surprise. "Well, it
was one of them." "Who exactly?" The trusties hadn‘t noticed
which one. "Why did you turn it over to him?" "We thought . . ."
"That‘s what the turkey thought! Think less and you‘ll be better
off." And that‘s that. They suggest we leave our things in the
vestibule to the bath: "No one‘s going to take them. Who needs
them?" We leave them, for after all we can‘t take them into the
bath with us anyway. We return and there are no sweaters left and
no fur—lined mittens. "What kind of a sweater was it?" "Grayish."
"Well, that means it went to the laundry." They also take things
from us honestly: in return for taking a suitcase into the storage
room for safekeeping; for putting us in a cell without the thieves;
for sending us off on prisoner transports as soon as possible; for
not sending us off as long as possible: The only thing they don‘t
do is rob us by main force out in the open.

"But those aren‘t thieves!" the connoisseurs among us explain.
"These are the bitches—the ones who work for the prison. They
are enemies of the honest thieves. And the honest thieves are the
ones imprisoned in cells." But somehow this is hard for our rab—
bity brains to grasp. Their ways are the same; they have the same
kind of tattoos. Maybe they really are enemies of those others,
but after all they are not our friends either, that‘s how it is. . . .

And by this time they have forced us to sit down in the yard
right underneath the cell windows. The windows all have "muz—
