36 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

student meetings and had clanked their Tsarist shackles in
pride."

In this game of the Big Solitaire, the majority of the old
political prisoners, survivors of hard labor, were destroyed, for
it was primarily the SR‘s and the Anarchists—not the Social
Democrats—who had received the harshest sentences from the
Tsarist courts. They in particular had made up the population of
the Tsarist hard—labor political prisons.

There was justice in the priorities of destruction, however; in
1920 they were all offered the chance to renounce in writing
their parties and party ideologies. Some declined—and they,
naturally, came up first for annihilation. Others signed such re—
nunciations, and thereby added a few years to their lifetimes. But
their turn, too, came implacably, and their heads rolled implac—
ably from their shoulders."

In the spring of 1922 the Extraordinary Commission for
Struggle Against Counterrevolution, Sabotage, and Speculation,
the Cheka, recently renamed the GPU, decided to intervene in
church affairs. It was called on to carry out a "church revolu—
tion"—to remove the existing leadership and replace it with one
which would have only one ear turned to heaven and the other
to the Lubyanka. The so—called "Living Church" people seemed
to go along with this plan, but without outside help they could
not gain control of the church apparatus. For this reason, the
Patriarch Tikhon was arrested and two resounding trials were
held, followed by the execution in Moscow of those who had
publicized the Patriarch‘s appeal and, in Petrograd, of the Metro—
politan Veniamin, who had attempted to hinder the transfer of
ecclesiastical power to the "Living Church" group. Here and
there in the provincial centers and even further down in the

17. V. G. Korolenko wrote to Gorky, June 29, 1921: "History will someday
note that the Bolshevik Revolution used the same means to deal with true
revolutionaries and socalists as did the Tsarist regime, in other words, purely
police measures."

18. Sometimes, reading a newspaper article, one is astonished to the point
of disbelief. In Izvestiya— of May 24, 1959, one could read that a year after
Hitler came to power Maximilian Hauke was arrested for belonging to none
other than the Communist Party. Was he destroyed? No, they sentenced him
to two years. After this was he, naturally, sentenced to a second term? No,
he was released. You can interpret that as you please! He proceeded to live
quietly and build an underground organization, in connection with which the
Izvestiya article on his courage appeared..
