468 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

"politicals" but also by those who were not recognized as such—
the KR‘s (Article 58—Counter—Revolutionaries) and all other
kinds of riffraff. However, those arrows which used to be so
piercing had been blunted somehow, or else some iron hand had
checked them in midflight. True, written declarations of impend—
ing hunger strikes were still accepted, and nothing subversive was
seen in them as yet. But unpleasant new rules were trotted out:
The hunger striker had to be isolated in a special solitary cell
(in the Butyrki it was in the Pugachev Tower). It was essential
to keep any knowledge about the hunger strike not only from
people outside, who might protest publicly, and from prisoners
in cells nearby, but even from those in the cell in which the hunger
striker had been imprisoned until that day—for that, too, con—
stituted a public, and it was necessary to separate him from it.
This measure had as its nominal justification the argument that
the prison administration had to make sure that the hunger strike
was going on honestly—that others in the cell weren‘t sneaking
food to the hunger striker. (And how had that been verified
previously? Through honest, "cross my heart" word of honor?)

Still, it was possible in those years to achieve at least one‘s
personal demands by this means.

From the thirties on, state thinking about hunger strikes took
a new turn. What did the state want with even such watered—down,
isolated, half—suppressed hunger strikes? Wasn‘t the ideal picture
one of prisoners who had no will of their own, nor the capacity to
make their own decisions—and of a prison administration that
did their thinking and their deciding for them? These are, if you
will, the only prisoners who can exist in the new society. And
so from the beginning of the thirties, they stopped accepting
declarations of hunger strikes as legal. "The hunger strike as a
method of resistance no longer exists," they proclaimed to Yeka—
terina Olitskaya in 1932, and they said the same thing to many
others.. The government has abolished your hunger strikes—and
that‘s that. But Ohtskaya refused to obey and began to fast. They
let her go on fasting in solitary for fiffeen days. Then they took
her to the hospital and put milk and dried crusts in front of her
to tempt her. But she stood firm, and on the nineteenth day she
won her victory: she got an extended outdoor period and news—
papers and parcels from: the Political Red Cross. (That‘s how one
