The Ships of the Archipelago | 507

would be cruel to require him to escort an enemy of the people in
an expensive overcoat or chrome—leather boots or with a swag
of luxurious city articles—and to reconcile himself to that in—
equality. Was not taking these things just one additional form of
the class struggle, after all? And what other norms were there?

In 1945—1946, when prisoners streamed in not just from any—
where but from Europe, and wore and had in their bags unheard—
of European articles, even the convoy officers could not restrain
themselves. Their service had kept them from the front, but at the
end of the war it also kept them from the harvest of booty—and,
I ask you, was that just?

And so, in these circumstances, the convoy guard systemati—
cally mixed the thieves and the politicals in each compartment of
their Stolypin, not through lack of space for them elsewhere and
not through haste, but out of greed. And the thieves did not let
them down: they stripped the beavers‘® of everything, and then
those possessions migrated into the suitcases of the convoy.

But what could be done if the beavers had been loaded into the
Stolypin cars, and the train was moving, and there simply weren‘t
any thieves at all—they simply hadn‘t put any aboard? What if
they weren‘t being shipped out on prisoner transports that day,
even from one of the stations along the way? This could and did
happen—several such cases are known.

In 1947 they were transporting from Moscow to the Vladimir
Central Prison a group of foreigners who had opulent possessions
—as could be seen the very first time their suitcases were opened.
At that point, the convoy itself began a systematic confiscation of
their belongings right there in the railroad car. So that nothing
should be missed, the prisoners were forced to undress down to
their bare skin and to sit on the floor of the car near the toilet
while their things were examined and taken away. But the convoy
guard failed to take into account that they were taking these
prisoners not to a camp but to a genuine prison. On their arrival
there, I. A. Korneyev handed in a written complaint, describing
exactly what had happened. They found the particular unit of
convoy guards and searched them. Some of the things were

10. A beaver in the blatnoi—underworld—jargon was any rich zek who
had "trash"—meaning good clothes—and "bacilli‘~—meaning fats, sugar, and
other goodies.
