360 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

had put the entire Central Committee of the Socialist Revolu—
tionary Party in prison! (As many of them as they could catch.)

That‘s how we do it!

But to keep them in prison—and hadn‘t it already been three
years?—wasn‘t it necessary to try them? And what should they
be charged with? "This period had not been sufficiently investi—
gated in the pretrial examination," our prosecutor complained.

But in the meanwhile one charge was correct. In that sane
February, 1919, the SR‘s had passed a resolution which they had
not put into effect, though in terms of the new Criminal Code
that didn‘t matter at all: to carry on secret agitation in the ranks
of the Red Army in order to induce the soldiers to refuse to par—
ticipate in reprisals against the peasants.

And that was a low—down, foul betrayal of the Revolution—to
try to persuade men not to take part in reprisals.

And they could also be charged with everything that the so—
called "Foreign Delegation of the Central Committee" of the SR‘s
—those prominent SR‘s who had fled to Europe—had said, writ—
ten, and done (mostly words).

But all that wasn‘t enough. So here‘s what they thought up:
"Many defendants sitting here would not deserve to be indicted in
the given case, were it not for the charge of having planned
terrorist acts." Allegedly, when the amnesty of 1919 had been
published, "none of the leaders of Soviet Justice had imagined"
that the SR ‘s had also planned to use terrorism against the leaders
of the Soviet state! (Well, indeed, who could possibly have im—
agined that! The SR‘s! And terrorism, all of a sudden? And if
it had come to mind, it would have been necessary to include it
in the amnesty too! Or else not accept the gap in the Kolchak
front. It was really very, very fortunate indeed that no one had
thought of it. Not until it was needed—then someone thought
of it.) So this charge had not been amnestied (for, after all,
struggle was the only offense that had been amnestied). And so
Krylenko could now make the charge!

And, in all likelihood, they had discovered so very much! So
very much!

In the first place, they had discovered what the SR leaders had
said"" back in the first days after the October seizure of power.

23. And what hadn‘t those chatterboxes said in the course of a lifetime?
