518 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

laugh at himself too. Such stories as his are a treasure. They are
meant to be heard. True, it took a long time to figure out why he
had been arrested and why he was considered a political. But
there‘s no real need to make a fetish of the category "political"
either. Does it matter a damn what rake they haul you in with?

As everyone knows very well, the Germans were preparing
for chemical warfare and we weren‘t. Therefore, it was most un—
fortunate that because of some dunderheads in the quartermas—
ter‘s department we left whole stacks of mustard—gas bombs at
a certain airdrome when we fled the Kuban—and the Germans
could have turned this fact into an international scandal. At
that point, Senior Lieutenant Koverchenko, a native of Krasnodar,
was assigned twenty parachutists and dropped behind the German
lines to bury all those invidious bombs. (Those hearing this
story have already guessed how it ends and are yawning: next
he was taken prisoner, and he has now become a traitor of the
Motherland. Nothing at all like that!) Koverchenko carried out
his assignment brilliantly and returned through the front with
his entire complement of men, having lost not one, and was
nominated to receive the order of Hero of the Soviet Union.

But it takes a month or two for the official nomination to be
confirmed—and what if you can‘t be contained within that Hero
of the Soviet Union either? "Heroes" are awarded to quiet boys
who are models of military and political preparedness—but what
if your soul is afire and you want a drink, and there isn‘t anything
to drink? And why, if you‘re a Hero of the whole Union, are
the rats being so stingy as to refuse you an extra liter of vodka?
And Ivan Koverchenko mounted his horse and, even though it‘s
true that he had never heard of Caligula, he rode his horse up—
stairs to the second floor to see the city‘s military commissar—
the commandant: Come on now, issue me some vodka. (He
figured this would be more imposing, more in the style of a
Hero, and harder to turn down.) Did they arrest him for that?
No, of course not! But his award was reduced from Hero to the
Order of the Red Banner.

Koverchenko had a large thirst, and vodka wasn‘t always
available, and so he had to be inventive. In Poland, he had gone
in and prevented the Germans from blowing up a certain bridge
—and he got the feeling this bridge really belonged to him and
so, for the time being, before our commandant‘s headquarters
