496 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

way, too, and it‘s insulting: why should a Soviet soldier have to
carry water like a donkey for enemies of the people? And there
are also times when they spend half a day hauling the Stolypin
cars way out from the station in order to reshuffile or recouple
the cars (it will be farther away from prying eyes), and the result
is that you can‘t get water even for your own Red Army mess.
True, there is one way out. You can go dip up some water from
the locomotive tender. It‘s yellow and murky, with some lubricat—
ing grease mixed in with it. But the zeks will drink it willingly.
It doesn‘t really matter that much anyway, since it isn‘t as if they
could see what they are drinking in the semidarkness of their
compartment. They don‘t have their own window, and there isn‘t
any light bulb there either, and what light they get comes from the
corridor. And there‘s another thing too: it takes a long time to
dole out that water. The zeks don‘t have their own mugs. Who—
ever did have one has had it taken away from him—so what it
adds up to is that they have to be given the two government issue
mugs to drink out of, and while they are drinking up you have to
keep standing there and standing, and dipping it out and dipping
it out some more and handing it to them. (Y¥es, and then, too, the
prisoners argue about who‘s to drink first; they want the healthy
prisoners to drink first, and only then those with tuberculosis, and
last of all those with syphilis! Just as if it wasn‘t going to begin
all over again in the next cell: first the healthy ones . . .)

But the convoy could have borne with all that, hauled the
water, and doled it out, if only those pigs, after slurping up the
water, didn‘t ask to go to the toilet. So here‘s the way it all works
out: if you don‘t give them water for a day, then they don‘t ask
to go to the toilet. Give them water once, and they go to the toilet
once; take pity on them and give them water twice—and they
go to the toilet twice. So it‘s pure and simple common sense: just
don‘t give them anything to drink.

And it isn‘t that one is stingy about taking them to the toilet
because one wants to be stingy about the use of the toilet itself,
but because taking prisoners to the toilet is a responsible—even,
one might say, a combat—operation: it takes a long, long time
for one private first class and two privates. Two guards have to
be stationed, one next to the toilet door, the other in the corridor
on the opposite side (so that no one tries to escape in that direc—
