First Cell, First Love | 233

the garage of the People‘s Commissariat of Petroleum—whose
existence no one would ever have suspected. (The next day, re—
turning from his interrogation, Belov was astonished that the
interrogator knew about them. And that‘s when it hit us.) Those
workers had heard the proclamation and approved it all, and
no one had turned in the Emperor! But he himself felt that it
was too early, and he burned it.

A year passed. Viktor Alekseyevich was working as a mechanic
in the garage of an automobile depot. In the fall of 1944, he
again wrote a proclamation and gave it to ten people to read—
chauffeurs and lathe operators. All of them approved it. And no
one turned him in. (It was a surprising thing, indeed, that not one
person in that group of ten had turned him in, in that period
of ubiquitous stool pigeons! Fastenko had not been mistaken in
his deductions about the "mood of the working class.") True,
in this case the Emperor had used some innocent tricks. He had
thrown out hints that a strong arm inside the government was on
his side. And he had promised his supporters travel assignments
to rally monarchic sentiment at the grass roots.

Months went by. The Emperor entrusted his secret to two
girls at the garage. But this time there was no misfire. These
girls turned out to be ideologically sound! And Viktor Alekseye—
vich‘s heart sank: he had a premonition of disaster. On the
Sunday after the Annunciation he went to the market, carrying
the proclamation with him. One of his sympathizers among the
old workers saw him there and said: "Viktor, you ought to burn
that piece of paper for the time being; how about it?" And Viktor
felt clearly that he had written it too soon, and that he should
burn it. "T‘ll burn it right now! You‘re right." And he started
home to burn it. But right there in the market two pleasant young
men called out to him: "Viktor Alekseyevich! Come along with
us!" And they took him to the Lubyanka in a private car. When
they got him there, they had been in such a hurry and were so
excited that they didn‘t search him in the usual way, and there
was a moment when the Emperor almost destroyed his proclama—
tion in the toilet. But he decided that it would be the worse for
him, that they would keep after him anyway to find out where it
was. And they straightaway took him in an elevator up to a
general and a colonel, and the general with his own hands
grabbed the proclamation from Viktor‘s pocket.
