Arrest | 15

and for eight years hid him in one apartment after another. The
priest suffered so painfully from this harried life that when he was
finally arrested in 1942 he sang hymns of praise to God.

In this chapter we are speaking only of the masses, the helpless
rabbits arrested for no one knows what reason. But in this book
we will also have to touch on those who in postrevolutionary times
remained genuinely political. Vera Rybakova, a Social Demo—
cratic student, dreamed when she was in freedom of being in the
detention center in Suzdal. Only there did she hope to encounter
her old comrades—for there were none of them left in freedom.
And only there could she work out her world outlook. The Socialist
Revolutionary—the SR—Yekaterina Olitskaya didn‘t consider
herself worthy of being imprisoned in 1924. After all, Russia‘s
best people had served time and she was still young and had not
yet done anything for Russia. But freedom itself was expelling
her. And so both of them went to prison—with pride and hap—
piness.

"Resistance! Why didn‘t you resist?" Today those who have
continued to live on in comfort scold those who suffered.

Yes, resistance should have begun right there, at the moment
of the arrest itself.

But it did not begin.

And so they are leading you. During a daylight arrest there is
always that brief and unique moment when they are leading you,
either inconspicuously, on the basis of a cowardly deal you have
made, or else quite openly, their pistols unholstered, through a
crowd of hundreds of just such doomed innocents as yourself.
You aren‘t gagged. You really can and you really ought to cry
out—to cry out that you are being arrested! That villains in dis—
guise are trapping people! That arrests are being made on the
strength of false denunciations! That millions are being subjected
to silent reprisals! If many such outcries had been heard all over
the city in the course of a day, would not our fellow citizens
perhaps have begun to bristle? And would arrests perhaps no
longer have been so easy?

In 1927, when submissiveness had not yet softened our brains
to such a degree, two Chekists tried to arrest a woman on Serpu—
khov Square during the day. She grabbed hold of the stanchion of
