The Law Matures | 413

the mountains to Frunze—and there he read that the death sen—
tence had been imposed on both men, and read the newspaper
articles which made clear what annihilating testimony they had
given against him. But did he hasten to stop that act of repres—
sion? And did he protest to the Party that something monstrous
was being done? No, all he did was send Koba a telegram asking
him to postpone the execution of Kamenev and Zinoviev so
that he, Bukharin, could get there to confront them and prove
himself innocent.

It was too late! Koba had enough of the sworn testimony; why
did he need living confrontations?

However, they still didn‘t arrest Bukharin for a long time. He
lost his job as editor—in—chief of Izvestiya and all his other Party
assignments and jobs, and he lived for half a year in his Kremlin
apartment—in the Poteshny Palace of Peter the Great—as if
in prison. (However, in the autumn he used to go to his dacha—
and the Kremlin guards would salute him as though nothing at
all had changed.) No one visited him or phoned him any longer.
And all during these months he wrote endless letters: "Dear
Koba! Dear Koba! Dear Koba!" And he got not one reply.

He was still trying to establish friendly contact with Stalin!

And Dear Koba, squinting, was already staging rehearsals.
For many long years Koba had been holding tryouts for various
roles, and he knew that Bukharchik would play his part beauti—
fully. He had, after all, already renounced those of his pupils and
supporters who had been arrested and exiled—they were few in
number in any case—and had allowed them to be destroyed."*
He had stood by and allowed his own line of thinking to be wiped
out and pilloried before it was fully developed and born. And
more recently, while he was still editor—in—chief of Izvestiya and
a member of the Politburo, he had accepted as legal the execution
of Kamenev and Zinoviev. Neither at the top of his lungs nor
even in a whisper had he expressed any indignation over that.
And yet these had all been tryouts for his own future role.

Way back in the past, when Stalin had threatened to expel him
(and all the rest of them) from the Party, Bukharin (like all the
rest) had renounced his views in order to remain in the Party.
And that, too, had been a tryout for his role. If that was how

36. The only one he defended was Yefim Tseitlin—but not for long.
