242 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

58—10, to defend them and to argue with the old man. But what
depths of enforced ignorance were achieved by the monstrous
lies of the state. Even the most broad—minded of us can embrace
only that part of the truth into which our own snout has blun—
dered.)* Wl >

How many wars Russia has been involved in! (It would have
been better if there had been fewer.) And were there many
traitors in all those wars? Had anyone observed that treason had
become deeply rooted in the hearts of Russian soldiers? Then,
under the most just social system in the world, came the most just
war of all—and out of nowhere millions of traitors appeared,
from among the simplest, lowliest elements of the population.
How is this to be understood and explained? '

Capitalist England fought at our side against Hitler; Marx
had eloquently described the poverty and suffering of the work—
ing class in that same England. Why was it that in this war only
one traitor could be found among them, the businessman "Lord
Haw Haw"—but in our country millions?

It is frightening to open one‘s trap about this, but might the —
heart of the matter not be in the political system?

One of our most ancient proverbs justifies the war prisoner:~
"The captive will cry out, but the dead man never." During the
reign of Tsar Aleksei Mikhailovich, nobility was granted for
durance in captivity! And in all subsequent wars it was considered
society‘s duty to exchange prisoners, to comfort one‘s own and
to give them sustenance and aid. Every escape from captivity was
glorified as the height of heroism. Throughout World War I,
money was collected in Russia to aid our prisoners of war, and
our nurses were permitted to go to Germany to help our prisoners,
and our newspapers reminded their readers daily that our pris— .
oners of war, our compatriots, were languishing in evil captivity.

4. Vitkovsky writes about this, on the basis of the thirties, in more general
terms. It was astonishing that the pseudo wreckers, who knew perfectly well
that they weren‘t wreckers, believed that military men and priests were being
shaken up justifiably, The military men, who knew they hadn‘t worked for
foreign intelligence services and had not sabotaged the Red Army, believed
readily enough that the engineers were wreckers and that the priests deserved
to be destroyed. Imprisoned, the Soviet person reasoned in the following way:
I personally am innocent, but any methods are justified in dealing with those
others, the enemies. The lessons of interrogation and the cell failed to enlighten
such people. Even after they themselves had been convicted, they retained
the blind beliefs of their days in freedom: belief in universal conspiracies, poi—
sonings, wrecking, espionage.
