The Supreme Measure | 451

Vlasov was put into Cell 61. This was a cell intended for
solitary confinement, sixteen feet long and a little more than three
feet wide. Two iron cots were anchored to the floor by thick
iron bolts, and on each cot two condemned men were lying, their
heads at opposite ends. Fourteen other prisoners were lying
crosswise on the cement floor.

Though it has long been well known that even a corpse has a
right to three arshins of earth (and even that seemed too little
to Chekhov), in this cell each of the condemned had been
allotted, while waiting for death, a little less than a third of that!

Vlasov asked whether executions were carried out immedi—
ately. "See for yourself. We‘ve been here for ages and we‘re still
alive."

The time of waiting began—of the well—known kind: the
prisoners didn‘t sleep all night long; in a state of total depression,
they waited to be led out to death; they listened for every rustling
in the corridor. (And the worst thing was that endless waiting
destroys the will to resist.) Particularly nerve—racking were the
nights following a day on which someone received a commutation
of sentence. He went off with cries of happiness, and fear thick—
ened in the cell. After all, rejections as well as commutation had
rolled down from the high mountain that day. And at night they
would come for someone.

Sometimes the locks rattled at night and hearts fell: Is it for
me? Not me! ! And the turnkey would open the wooden door for
some nonsense or other: "Take your things off the window sill."
That unlocking of the door probably took a year off the lives
of all nineteen inmates; maybe if that door was unlocked a
mere fifty times, they wouldn‘t have to waste bullets! But how
grateful to him everyone was because everything was all right:
"We‘ll take them off right away, citizen chief!"

After the morning visit to the toilet, they went to sleep,
liberated from their fears. Then the jailer brought in the pail
of gruel and said: "Good morning!" According to prison rules,
the inner, iron door was supposed to be opened only in the
presence of the duty officer for the prison. But, as is well known,
human beings are better and lazier than their rules and instruc—
tions, and in the morning the jailer came in without the duty
officer and greeted them quite humanly—no, it was even more
precious than that: "Good morning!"
