The Interrogation | 111

18. The accused could be compelled to stand on his knees—
not in some figurative sense, but literally: on his knees, without
sitting back on his heels, and with his back upright. People
could be compelled to kneel in the interrogator‘s office or the
corridor for twelve, or even twenty—four or forty—eight hours.
(The interrogator himself could go home, sleep, amuse himself
in one way or another—this was an organized system; watch was
kept over the kneeling prisoner, and the guards worked in
shifts.)‘* What kind of prisoner was most vulnerable to such
treatment? One already broken, already inclined to surrender.
It was also a good method to use with women. Ivanov—Razumnik
reports a variation of it: Having set young Lordkipanidze on his
knees, the interrogator urinated in his face! And what happened?
Unbroken by anything else, Lordkipanidze was broken by this.
Which shows that the method also worked well on proud
people. ...

19. Then there is the method of simply compelling a prisoner
to stand there. This can be arranged so that the accused stands
only while being interrogated—because that, too, exhausts and
breaks a person down. It can be set up in another way—so that
the prisoner sits down during interrogation but is forced to stand
up between interrogations. (A watch is set over him, and the
guards see to it that he doesn‘t lean against the wall, and if he
goes to sleep and falls over he is given a kick and straightened
up.) Sometimes even one day of standing is enough to deprive
a person of all his strength and to force him to testify to anything
at all.

20. During all these tortures which involved standing for
three, four, and five days, they ordinarily deprived a person of
water.

The most natural thing of all is to.combine the psychological
and physical methods. It is also natural to combine all the pre—
ceding methods with:

21. Sleeplessness, which they quite failed to appreciate in
medieval times. They did not understand how narrow are the
limits within which a human being can preserve his personality

14. That, after all, is how somebody‘s career was launched—standing guard
over a prisoner on his knees. And now, in all probability, that somebody has
attained high rank and his children are already grown up.
