244 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

down and let oneself be trampled to death. Every blade of grass
pushes its fragile length upward in order to live. As for you—
lie down and be trampled on. Even though you‘ve been slow
about it, even though you couldn‘t do it on the battlefield, at least
die now; then you will not be prosecuted.

The soldiers sleep. They spoke their word
And they are right for eternity.

And every other path which, in desperation, your mind may
invent is going to lead you into conflict with the Law.

Escape and return to the Motherland—past the guards ring—
ing the camp, across half Germany, then through Poland or the
Balkans—led straight to SMERSH and prison. They were asked:
How did you manage to escape when others couldn‘t? This stinks!
Come on, you rat, what assignment did they give you? (Mikhail
Burnatsev, Pavel Bondarenko, and many, many others.)°

Escaping to the Western partisans, to the Resistance forces,

5. It has become the accepted thing for our literary critics to say that Shol—
okhov, in his immortal story "Sudba Cheloveka"—"The Fate of a Man"—
spoke the "bitter truth" about "this side of our life" and that he "revealed" the
problem. But we must retort that in this story, which is in general very inferior,
and in which the passages about the war are pale and unconvincing—since the
author evidently knew nothing about the last war—and the descriptions of
Germans are unconvincing cartoon clichés (only the hero‘s wife is successfully
portrayed—because she is a pure Christian straight out of Dostoyevsky), in
this story about a war prisoner, the real problem of the war prisoners was
hidden or distorted:

(1) The author picked the least incriminating form of being taken prisoner
conceivable—the soldier was captured while unconscious, so as to make him
noncontroversial and to bypass the whole poignancy of the problem. (What if
he had been conscious when he was taken prisoner, as was most often the
case? What would have happened to him then?)

(2) The fact that the Motherland had deserted us, had renounced us, had
cursed us, was not presented as the war prisoner‘s chief problem. Sholokhov
says not a word about it. But it was because of that particular factor that there
was no way out. On the contrary, he identifies the presence of traitors among
us as constituting the problem. (But if this really was the main thing, one
might then expect him to have investigated further and explained where they
came from a full quarter—century after a Revolution that was supported by
the entire people!)

(3) Sholokhov dreamed up a fantastic, spy—story escape from captivity,
stretching innumerable points to avoid the obligatory, inevitable procedural step
of the returned war prisoner‘s reception in SMERSH—the Identification and
Screening Camp. Not only was Sokolov, the hero, not put behind barbed wire,
as provided in the regulations, but—and this is a real joke—he was given a
month‘s holiday by his colonel! (In other words: the freedom to carry out
the assignment given him by the Fascist intelligence service. So his colonel
would end up in the same place as he!)
