128 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

pull your legs apart, seat assistants on them (from the glorious
corps of sergeants!) who also hold down your arms; and then the
interrogator (and women interrogators have not shrunk from
this) stands between your legs and with the toe of his boot (or
of her shoe) gradually, steadily, and with ever greater pressure
crushes against the floor those organs which once made you a
man. He looks into your eyes and repeats and repeats his ques—
tions or the betrayal he is urging on you. If he does not press
down too quickly or just a shade too powerfully, you still have
fifteen seconds left in which to scream that you will confess to
everything, that you are ready to see arrested all twenty of those
people he‘s been demanding of you, or that you will slander in the
newspapers everything you hold holy. . . .

And may you be judged by God, but not by people. . . .

"There is no way out! You have to confess to everything!"
whisper the stoolies who have been planted in the cell.

"It‘s a simple question: hang onto your health!" say people
with common sense.

"You can‘t get new teeth," those who have already lost them
nod at you.

"They are going to convict you in any case, whether you con—
fess or whether you don‘t," conclude those who have got to the
bottom of things.

"Those who don‘t sign get shot!" prophesies someone else in
the corner. "Out of vengeance! So as not to risk any leaks about
how they conduct interrogations."

"And if you die in the interrogator‘s office, they‘ll tell your
relatives you‘ve been sentenced to camp without the right of
correspondence. And then just let them look for you."

If you are an orthodox Communist, then another orthodox
Communist will sidle up to you, peering about with hostile sus—
picion, and he‘ll begin to whisper in your ear so that the un—
initiated cannot overhear:

"It‘s our duty to support Soviet interrogation. It‘s a combat
situation. We ourselves are to blame. We were too softhearted;
and now look at all the rot that has multiplied in the country.
There is a vicious secret war going on. Even here we are sur—
rounded by enemies. Just listen to what they are saying! The
