330 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

of the same committees as those who were present, a circum—
stance that gave us the right to equate those who were absent
with those who were present. And their letters dealt with their
disagreements with Denikin on certain trivial questions: the
peasant question (we are not told what these differences were,
but they were evidently advising Denikin to give the land to the
peasants) ; the Jewish question (they were evidently advising him
not to return to the previous restrictions) ; the federated nationali—
ties question (enough said: clear); the question of the structure
of the government (democracy rather than dictatorship); and
similar matters. And what conclusion did this evidence suggest?
Very simple. It proved the fact of correspondence, and it also
proved the agreement, the unanimity, of those present with
Denikin! (Girt! Grrtt!)

But there were also direct accusations against those present:
that they had exchanged information with acquaintances who
lived in outlying areas (Kiev, for example) which were not under
the control of the central Soviet authorities! In other words, this
used to be Russia, let‘s say, but then in the interests of world
revolution we ceded this one piece to Germany. And people
continued to exchange letters. How are you doing there, Ivan
Ivanich? Here‘s how things are going with us. N. M. Kishkin,
a member of the Central Committee of the Cadets, was so brazen
as to try to justify himself right from the defendants‘ bench: "A
man doesn‘t want to be blind. He tries to find out everything he
can about what‘s going on everywhere."

To find out everything about what‘s going on everywhere? He
doesn‘t want to be blind? Well, all one can say is that the accuser
correctly described their actions as treason, tfreason to Soviet
power!

But their most heinous acts were something else again. In the
midst of the Civil War they wrote books, composed memoranda
and projects. Yes, as experts in constitutional law, financial
science, economic relationships, the system of justice, and educa—
tion, they wrote works! (And, as one might easily guess, their
works were not based on earlier works by Lenin, Trotsky, and
Bukharin.) Professor Kotlyarevsky wrote on the federal struc—
ture of Russia; V. I. Stempkovsky on the agrarian question (no
doubt, without collectivization); V. S. Muralevich on education
in the future Russia; N. N. Vinogradsky on economics. And the
