The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 75

the endless letters to Stalin were being read."" His next—door
neighbor denounced him. (Where, oh where, is that neighbor
today?) He got SOE—"Socially Dangerous Element"—eight
years.

A half—literate stovemaker used to enjoy writing his name in
his free time. This raised his self—esteem. There was no blank
paper around, so he wrote on newspapers. His neighbors found his
newspaper in the sack in the communal toilet, with pen—and—ink
flourishes across the countenance of the Father and Teacher.
Anti—Soviet Agitation—ten years.

Stalin and those close to him loved their portraits and splashed
them all over the newspapers and issued them in millions of
copies. The flies paid little heed to their sanctity, and it was a pity
not to make use of the paper—and how many unfortunates got
a term for that!

Arrests rolled through the streets and apartment houses like
an epidemic. Just as people transmit an epidemic infection from
one to another without knowing it, by such innocent means as a
handshake, a breath, handing someone something, so, too, they
passed on the infection of inevitable arrest by a handshake, by a
breath, by a chance meeting on the street. For if you are destined
to confess tomorrow that you organized an underground group
to poison the city‘s water supply, and if today I shake hands with
you on the street, that means I, too, am doomed.

Seven years earlier the city had watched while they massacred
the countryside and considered it only natural. Now the country—
side might have watched them massacre the city, but the country—
side itself was too dark for that, and was still undergoing the
finishing touches of its own slaughter.

The surveyor (!) Saunin got fifteen years for . . . cattle plague
(!) in the district and for bad harvests (!) (and the entire leader—
ship of the district was shot for the same reason).

The secretary of a District Party Committee went into the
fields to speed up the plowing, and an old peasant asked him
whether he knew that for seven years the collective farmers had
received not one single ounce of grain in return for their "labor
days"—only straw and very little of that. For his question the
peasant got ASA—Anti—Soviet Agitation—ten years.

38. Who remembers them? They went on and on every day for hours!

Stupefyingly identical! Levitan, the announcer, probably remembers them well:
he used to read them in rolling tones, with great expression!
