500 | THE GULAG ARCHIPEL AGO

cals with criminals! Criminals were teamed up and driven along
the streets to the station so as to expose them to public disgrace.
And politicals could go there in carriages. (Olminsky, in 1899.)
Politicals were not fed from the common pot but were given a
food allowance instead and had their meals brought from public
eating houses. The Bolshevik Olminsky didn‘t want even the
hospital rations because he found the food too coarse." The Bu—
tyrki Prison superintendent apologized to Olminsky for the jailer‘s
having addressed him too familiarly: You see, we seldom get
politicals here, and the jailer didn‘t know any better!

Seldom get politicals in the Butyrki? What kind of dream is
this? Then where were they? The Lubyanka didn‘t exist as a
prison at the time, and neither did Lefortovo!

The writer Radishchev was taken to the prisoner transport in
shackles, and when the weather got cold they threw over him a
"repulsive, raw sheepskin coat," which they had taken from a
watchman. However, the Empress Catherine immediately issued
orders that his shackles be removed and that he be provided with
everything he required for his journey. But in November, 1927,
Anna Skripnikova was sent on a transport from the Butyrki to the
Solovetsky Islands in a straw hat and a summer dress. (That was
what she had been wearing when she was arrested in the summer,
and since that time her room had been sealed and no one was
willing to give her permission to get her winter things out of it.)

To draw a distinction between political prisoners and common
criminals is the equivalent of showing them respect as equal op—
ponents, of recognizing that people may have views of their own.
Thus a political prisoner is conscious of political freedom even
when under arrest. '

But since the time when we all became KR‘s and the socialists
failed to retain their status as politicals, since then any protest
that as a political you ought not to be mixed up with ordinary
criminals has resulted only in laughter on the prisoners‘ part and
bewilderment on the part of the jailers. "All are criminals here,"
the jailers reply—sincerely.

This mingling, this first devastating encounter, takes place
either in the Black Maria or in the Stolypin car. Up to this

5. Because of all of this the ordinary criminal mob christened the profes—
sional revolutionaries "mangy swells." (P. F. Yakubovich.)
