372 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

and instructive impact of the measure. The crystal—clear line—up
of forces on the class front in Soviet Russia was, to put it simply,
spoiled by the presence of this shapeless, jellylike stain of the old
bourgeois intelligentsia, which in the ideological area genuinely
played the role of miliftary spies—and the very best solution one
could imagine was to scrape off that stagnant scum of ideas and
toss it out abroad.

Comrade Lenin had already been stricken by his illness, but
the members of the Politburo had apparently given their approval,
and Comrade Dzerzhinsky had done the catching. At the end of
1922, about three hundred prominent Russian humanists were
loaded onto—a barge, perhaps? No, they were put on a steamer
and sent off to the European garbage dump. (Among those who
settled down in exile and acquired reputations were the philos—
ophers N. O. Lossky, S. N. Bulgakov, N. A. Berdyayev, F. A.
Stepun, B. P. Vysheslavtsev, L. P. Karsavin, S. L. Frank, I. A.
Ilin; the historians S. P. Melgunov, V. A. Myakotin, A. A.
Kizevetter, I. I. Lapshin, and others; the writers and publicists
Y. I. Aikhenvald, A. S. Izgoyev, M. A. Osorgin, A. V. Peshe—
khonov. At the beginning of 1923, additional small groups were
sent off, including for example V. F. Bulgakov, the secretary of
Lev Tolstoi. And because of questionable associations some
mathematicians also shared this fate, including D. F. Selivanoyv.)

However, it didn‘t work out constantly and systematically. Per—
haps the roar with which the émigrés announced that they re—
garded it as a "gift" made it apparent that this punishment left
something to be desired, that it was a mistake to have let go
good material for the executioner, and that poisonous flowers
might grow on that garbage dump. And so they abandoned this
form of punishment. And all subsequent purging led to either the
executioner or the Archipelago.

The improved Criminal Code promulgated in 1926, which,
in effect, continued right into Khrushchev‘s times, tied all the
formerly scattered political articles into one durable dragnet—
Article 58—and the roundup was under way. The catch swiftly
expanded to include the engineering and technical intelligentsia;
it was especially dangerous because it occupied a firm position
in the economy and it was hard to keep an eye on it with the
help of the Progressive Doctrine alone. It now became clear that
