The Law as a Child | 323

And the accuser was astonished. What danger threatened the
Patriarch? Why had plans been made to defend him?

Well, of course, it was really no more than the fact that the
Cheka had for two years been conducting extrajudicial reprisals
against undesirables, the fact that only a short while before four
Red Army men in Kiev had killed the Metropolitan, the fact that
the Patriarch‘s "case had already been worked up and com—
pleted, and all that remained was to bring it before the Rev—
tribunal," and "it was only out of concern for the broad masses
of workers and peasants, still under the influence of clerical
propaganda, that we have left these, our class enemies, alone for
the time being."*" How could Orthodox believers possibly be
alarmed on the Patriarch‘s account? During those two years
Patriarch Tikhon had refused to keep silent. He had sent messages
to the People‘s Commissars, to the clergy, and to his flock. His
messages were not accepted by the printers but were copied on
typewriters (the first samizdat). They exposed the annihilation
of the innocents, the ruin of the country. How, therefore, could
anyone really be concerned for the Patriarch‘s life?

A second charge was brought against the defendants. Through—
out the country, a census and requisition of church property was
taking place (this was in addition to the closing of monasteries
and the expropriation of church lands and properties; in question
here were liturgical vessels, cups, and candelabra). And the
Council of Parishes had disseminated an appeal to believers to
resist the requisition, sounding the alarm on the church bells.
(And that was natural, after all! That, after all, was how they
had defended the churches against the Tatars too!)

And the third charge against them was their incessant, im—
pudent dispatching of petitions to the Council of People‘s Com—
missars for relief from the desecration of the churches by local
authorities, from crude blasphemy and violations of the law which
guaranteed freedom of conscience. Even though no action was
taken on these petitions (according to the testimony of Bonch—
Bruyevich, administrative officer of the Council of People‘s Com—
missars), they had discredited the local authorities.

Taking into consideration all the violations committed by these
defendants, what punishment could the accuser possibly demand

49. Krylenko, op. cit., p. 61.
