The Supreme Measure | 447

could not impose anything less than a deserved penalty on the
criminals—death. But as soon as the sentences had been pro—
nounced and entered into the official record of interrogation
and trial, the scarecrows now called condemned men no longer
interested them. And, in actual fact, there hadn‘t been any sedi—
tion involved, nor would the life of the state be affected in any
way if these condemned men remained alive. So they were left
entirely to the prison administration. And that administration,
which was closely associated with Gulag, looked at prisoners
from the economic point of view. To them the important figures
were not an increase in the number of executions but an increase
in the manpower sent out to the Archipelago.

And that is exactly the light in which Sokolov, the chief of
the internal prison of the Big House in Leningrad, viewed
Strakhovich, who finally became bored in the death cell and
asked for paper and pencil for his scientific work. In a notebook
he first composed "On the Interaction of a Liquid and a Solid
Moving in It," and then "Calculations for Ballistas, Springs and
Shock Absorbers," and then "Bases of the Theory of Stability."
They had already allotted him an individual "scientific‘ cell and
fed him better, and questions began to come to him from the
Leningrad Front. He worked out for them "Volumetric Weapons‘
Fire Against Aircraft." And it all ended with Zhdanov‘s com—
muting his death sentence to fifteen years. (The mail from the
mainland was slow, but soon his regular commutation order
came from Moscow, and it was more generous than Zhdanov‘s:
merely a tenner.)°

And N.P., a mathematician with the rank of assistant pro—
fessor, was exploited by the interrogator Kruzhkov (yes, yes,
that same thief) for his personal ends. Kruzhkov was taking
correspondence courses. And so he summoned P. from the death
cell and gave him problems to solve in the theory of functions of
a complex variable for Kruzhkov‘s assignments (and probably
they weren‘t even his either).

So what did world literature understand about pre—execution
suffering?

9. Strakhovich has all his prison notebooks even now. And his "scientific
career" outside the bars only began with them. He was destined later on to
head up one of the first projects in the U.S.S.R. for a turbojet engine.
