214 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

1941, and again in 1944. Some of their sons were conscripted by
the Russian Army, and others by the German Army, and still
others ran off into the woods. The elderly Tallinn intellectuals
discussed how they might break out of that iron ring, break away
somehow, and live for themselves and by themselves. Their
Premier might, possibly, have been Tief, and their Minister of
Education, say, Susi. But neither Churchill nor Roosevelt cared
about them in the least; but "Uncle Joe" did. And during the
very first nights after the Soviet armies entered Tallinn, all these
dreamers were seized in their Tallinn apartments. Fifteen of them
were imprisoned in various cells of the Moscow Lubyanka, one in
each, and were charged under Article 58—2 with the criminal
desire for national self—determination.

Each time we returned to the cell from our walk was like
being arrested again. Even in our very special cell the air seemed
stifling after the outdoors. And it would have been good to have
a snack afterward too. But it was best not to think about it—
not at all. It was bad if one of the prisoners who received food
parcels tactlessly spread out his treasures at the wrong time and
began to eat. All right, we‘ll develop self—control! It was bad,
too, to be betrayed by the author of the book you were reading—
if he began to drool over food in the greatest detail. Get away
from me, Gogol! Get away from me, Chekhov, too! They both
had too much food in their books. "He didn‘t really feel like
eating, but nevertheless he ate a helping of veal and drank some
beer." The son—of—a—bitch! It was better to read spiritual things!
Dostoyevsky was the right kind of author for prisoners to read!
Yet even in Dostoyevsky you could find that passage "The chil—
dren went hungry. For several days they had seen nothing but
bread and sausage."

The Lubyanka library was the prison‘s principal ornament.
True, the librarian was repulsive—a blond spinster with a horsy
build, who did everything possible to make herself ugly. Her
face was so whitened that it looked like a doll‘s immobile mask;
her lips were purple; and her plucked eyebrows were black. (You
might say that was her own business, but we would have enjoyed
it more if she had been a charmer. However, perhaps the chief
of the Lubyanka had already taken that into consideration?)
But here was a wonder: once every ten days, when she came to
