40 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

Soviet institutions. In such cases, slips of the tongue, chance
recognitions, and the denunciations of neighbors helped battle—
intelligence—so to speak. (Sometimes sheer accident took a
hand. Solely out of a love of order, a certain Mova kept at home
a list of all former employees of the provincial judiciary. This was
discovered by accident in 1925, and they were all arrested and
shot.)

And so the waves rolled on—for "concealment of social origin"
and for "former social origin." This received the widest interpreta—
tion. They arrested members of the nobility for their social origin.
They arrested members of their families. Finally, unable to draw
even simple distinctions, they arrested members of the "Individual
nobility"—i.e., anybody who had simply graduated from a uni—
versity. And once they had been arrested, there was no way back.
You can‘t undo what has been done! The Sentinel of the Revolu—
tion never makes a mistake!

(No. There were a few ways back! The counterwaves were
thin, sparse, but they did sometimes break through. The first is
worthy of mention right heré. Among the wives and daughters of
the nobility and the officers there were quite often women of out—
standing personal qualities and attractive appearance. Some suc—
ceeded in breaking through in a small reverse wave! They were the
ones who remembered that life is given to us only once and that
nothing is more precious to us than our own life. They offered
their services to the Cheka—GPU as informers, as colleagues, in
any capacity whatsoever—and those who were liked were ac—
cepted. These were the most fertile of all informers! They helped
the GPU a great deal, because "former" people trusted them. Here
one can name the last Princess Vyazemskaya, a most prominent
postrevolutionary informer [as was her son on the Solovetsky
Islands]. And Konkordiya Nikolayevna losse was evidently a
woman of brilliant qualities: her husband was an officer who had
been shot in her presence, and she herself was exiled to the
Solovetsky Islands. But she managed to beg her way out and to
set up a salon near the Big Lubyanka which the important figures
of that establishment loved to frequent. She was not arrested again
until 1937, along with her Yagoda customers.)

It is strange to recount, but as a result of an absurd tradition
the Political Red Cross had been preserved from Old Russia.
