The Law Matures | 373

the trial in defense of Oldenborger had been a mistake—after all,
a very nice little center had been organized there. And Krylenko‘s
declaration that "there was no question of sabotage on the part
of the engineers in 1920 and 1921"" had granted an all too hasty
absolution. Now it was not sabotage but worse—wrecking, a
word discovered, it appears, by a rank—and—file interrogator in
the Shakhty case.

It had no sooner been established that wrecking was what had
to be tracked down—notwithstanding the nonexistence of this
concept in the entire history of mankind—than they began to
discover it without any trouble in all branches of industry and
in all individual enterprises. However, there was no unity of plan,
no perfection of execution, in all these hit—or—miss discoveries,
although Stalin, by virtue of his character, and of course the
entire investigative branch of our judicial apparatus, evidently
aspired to just that. But our Law had finally matured and could
show the world something really perfect—a big, coordinated,
well—organized trial, this time a trial of engineers. And that is
how the Shakhty case came about.

K. The Shakhty Case—May 18—July 15, 1928

This case was tried before a Special Assize of the Supreme
Court of the U.S.S.R., under Presiding Judge A. Y. Vyshinsky
(who was still the Rector of First Moscow University) ; the chief
accuser was N. V. Krylenko (what a significant encounter!—
rather like a handing over of the juridical relay—baton).> There
were fifty—three defendants and fifty—six witnesses. How spec—
tacular!

Alas, in its spectacular aspect lay the weakness of this case.
If one were to tie to each of the defendants only three threads of
evidence, there would still have to be 159 of them. And mean—
while Krylenko had only ten fingers and Vyshinsky another ten.
Of course, the "defendants strove to expose their heinous crimes

2. Krylenko, Za Pyat Let, p. 437.

3. And the members of the tribunal were the old revolutionaries Vasilyev—
Yuzhin and Antonov—Saratovsky. The very simple folk sound of their family
names inclines one to a favorable reaction. They are easy to remember. And
when suddenly, in 1962, obituaries of certain victims of repression appeared in

Izvestiya, whose signature was at the bottom? That of the long—lived Antonov—
Saratovsky!
