402 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

nearly hauled from the rostrum, and he apologized, but there—
after in his speech he maneuvered so adroitly and so won over
his listeners that at the end he called them enemies of the people
again, and this time to stormy applause. He was elected to the
delegation sent to the Petrograd Soviet, and hardly had he
arrived there than—with the informality of those days—he was
named to the Military Commission of the Petrograd Soviet. There
he exerted a strong influence on the appointment of army com—
missars,"* and in the end he became an army commissar on the
Southwestern Front and personally arrested Denikin in Vinnitsa
(after the Kornilov revolt), and regretted very much indeed
(during the trial as well) that he had not shot him on the spot.

Clear—eyed, always sincere, and always completely absorbed
in his own ideas—whether they were right or wrong—he was
counted as—and was—one of the younger members of the Men—
shevik Party. This did not prevent him, however, from presenting
his own projects to the Menshevik leadership with boldness and
passion, such as, in the spring of 1917, proposing the formation
of a Social Democratic government, or, in 1919, recommending
that the Mensheviks enter the Comintern. (Dan and the others
invariably rejected all his plans and their variations, and quite
condescendingly, for that matter.) In July, 1917, he was very
pained by the action of the socialist Petrograd Soviet in approv—
ing the Provisional Government‘s calling up army units for use
against other socialists, considering it a fatal error even though
the other socialists were using armed force. Hardly had the Octo—
ber coup taken place than Yakubovich proposed to his party
that it should support the Bolsheviks wholeheartedly and work
to improve the state structure they were creating. In the upshot,
he was finally ostracized by Martov, and by 1920 he had left the
ranks of the Mensheviks once and for all, convinced that he
— _ could not get them to follow the Bolsheviks‘ path.

I have gone into all this detail to make it quite clear that
throughout the Revolution Yakubovich had been not a Men—
shevik but a Bolshevik, and one who was entirely sincere and
disinterested. In 1920 he was still one of the Smolensk food—
supply commissars, and the only one of them who was not a

34. He is not to be confused with Colonel Yakubovich of the General Staff,
who, at the same time and the same meetings, represented the War Ministry.
