188 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

system at work. During his once—a—minute peephole inspection,
the jailer was supposed to make sure that the gifts of the prison
administration were not being misused: that the teapot was not
being used to break down the wall; that no one was swallowing
the chessmen and thereby possibly cashing in his chips and
ceasing to be a citizen of the U.S.S.R.; and that no one was
starting a fire with the books in the hope of burning down the
whole prison. And a prisoner‘s eyeglasses were considered so
potentially dangerous that they were not allowed to remain on
the table during the night; the prison administration took them
away until morning.)

What a cozy life! Chess, books, cots with springs, decent
mattresses, clean linen. I could not remember having slept like
this during the whole war. There was a worn parquet floor. One
could take nearly four strides from window to door in the aisle
between the cots. No, indeed! This central political prison was
a real resort.

And no shells were falling. I remembered their sounds: the
high—pitched sobbing way up overhead, then the rising whistle,
and the crash as they burst. And how tenderly the mortar shells
whistled. And how everything trembled from the four blasts of
what we called "Dr. Goebbels‘ mortar—rockets." And I remem—
bered the wet snow and mud near Wormditt, where I had been
arrested, which our men were still wading through to keep the
Germans from breaking out of our encirclement.

All right then, the hell with you; if you don‘t want me to fight,
I won‘t.

Among our many lost values there is one more: the high worth
of those people who spoke and wrote Russian before us. It is odd
that they are almost undescribed in our prerevolutionary litera—
ture. Only very rarely do we feel their breath—from Marina
Tsvetayeva, or from "Mother Mariya" (in her Recollections of
Blok). They saw too much to settle on any one thing. They
reached toward the sublime too fervently to stand firmly on the
earth. Before societies fall, just such a stratum of wise, thinking
people emerges, people who are that and nothing more. And how
they were laughed at! How they were mocked! As though they
