The Law as a Child | 313

the law courts, but then the Revolution had come—and he had
wormed his way into the Revtribunal. Just yesterday all this had
been depicted in a very favorable light, but it had suddenly be—
come repulsive!

More repulsive than them both was, of course, Gugel. He had
been a publisher. And what intellectual food had he been offer—
ing the workers and peasants? He was "nourishing the broad
masses. with low—quality literature," not Marx but, instead, books
by bourgeois professors with world—famous names. (And we
shall soon encounter these professors as defendants too.)

Krylenko is enraged and marvels at the kind of people who
have sneaked into the tribunal. (Neither do we understand: What
kind of people are the workers‘ and peasants‘ tribunals composed
of? Why had the proletariat entrusted the task of striking down
their enemies to people of this particular kind?)

And as for Grin, the lawyer, a man with an ‘"in" on the in—
vestigating commission, who was quite able to get anybody off
scot—free, he was a typical representative of that subspecies of
the human race which Marx called "leeches on the capitalist
structure"—a category including, in addition, all lawyers, gen—
darmes, priests, and also . . . notaries."

It appears that Krylenko spared no effort in demanding merci—
lessly severe sentences, without reference to "the individual shad—
ings of guilt." But some kind of lethargy, some sort of torpor,
overcame the eternally vigorous tribunal, and it .just barely man—
aged to mumble six months in jail for the interrogators, and a
fine for the lawyer. And only by availing himself of the authority
of the All—Russian Central Executive Committee "to punish
without limitation," did Krylenko, there in the Metropole, con—
tinue to hang ten—year sentences on the interrogators and five
on the lawyer, plus full confiscation of his property. Krylenko
thundered on about vigilance, and he almost managed, but not
quite, to get the title of Tribune he so coveted.

We recognize that among the revolutionary masses at the
time, as among our readers today, this unfortunate trial could not
but undermine faith in the sanctity of the tribunal. And we there—
fore proceed with even greater timidity to the next case, which
concerned an even loftier institution.

33. Ibid., p. 500.
