508 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

recovered and returned to their owners, who also received com—
pensation in money for those that weren‘t recovered. They say
that the convoy guards got from ten to fifteen years. However,
this is something that cannot be checked, and anyway they would
have been convicted under an ordinary nonpolitical article of the
Code, and they wouldn‘t have had to spend a long time in prison.
However, that was an exceptional case, and if he had managed
to restrain his greed in time, the chief of the convoy would have
realized that it was better not to get involved in it. And here is
another, less complicated case, which probably means that it
happened often. In August, 1945, in the Moscow—Novosibirsk
Stolypin car (in which A. Susi was being transported), it turned
out that there weren‘t any thieves. And the trip was a long one,
and the Stolypins just crawled along at that time. Without hurry—
ing in the least, all in good time, the convoy chief declared a
search—one prisoner at a time in the corridor with his things.
Those summoned were made to undress in accordance with prison
rules, but that wasn‘t why the search was being conducted, for
each prisoner who had been searched was, in fact, put right back
into his own crowded compartment, and any knife, anything for—
bidden, could simply have been passed from hand to hand. The
real purpose of the search was to examine their personal articles
—the clothes they were wearing and whatever was in their bags.
And right there, beside the bags, not in the least bored by the
whole protracted search, the chief of the convoy guard, an officer,
stood with a haughty poker face, with his assistant, a sergeant,
beside him. Sinful greed kept trying to pop out, but the officer
kept it hidden under a pretended indifference. It was the same
situation as an old rake looking over little girls but embarrassed
by the presence of outsiders—yes, and by that of the girls too—
and not knowing exactly how to proceed. How badly he needed
just a few thieves! But there were no thieves in the transport.
There were no thieves aboard, but there were individuals among
the prisoners who had already been infected by the thief—laden
atmosphere of the prison. After all, the example of thieves is
instructive and calls forth imitations: it demonstrates that there is
an easy way to live in prison. Two recent officers were in one of
the compartments—Sanin (from the navy) and Merezhkov. They
were both 58‘s, but their attitudes had already changed. Sanin,
