First Cell, First Love | 209

left freedom). Twice a month the morning duty officer asked:
"Who wants to write a petition?" And they listed everyone who
wanted to. In the middle of the day they would lead you to an
individual box and lock you up in it. In there, you could write
whomever you pleased: the Father of the Peoples, the Central
Committee of the Party, the Supreme Soviet, Minister Beria,
Minister Abakumov, the General Prosecutor, the Chief Military
Prosecutor, the Prison Administration, the Investigation Depart—
ment. You could complain about your arrest, your interrogator,
even the chief of the prison! In each and every case your petition
would have no effect whatever. It would not be stapled into any
file, and the most senior official to read it would be your own
interrogator. However, you were in no position to prove this. In
fact, it was rather more likely that he would not read it, because
no one would be able to read it. On a piece of paper measuring
seven by ten centimeters—in other words, three by four inches—
a little larger than the paper given you each morning at the
toilet, with a pen broken in the middle or bent into a hook, and
an inkwell with pieces of rag in it and ink diluted with water, you
would just be able to scratch out "Petit . . ." Then the letters
would all run together on the cheap paper, "ion" couldn‘t be
worked into the line, and everything would come through on the
other side of the sheet.

You might have still other rights, but the duty officer would
keep quiet about them. And you wouldn‘t be losing much, truth
to tell, even if you didn‘t find out about them.

The check—up came and went. And the day began. The inter—
rogators were already arriving there somewhere. The turnkey
would summon one of us with a great air of secrecy; he called out
the first letter of the name only. Like this: "Whose name begins
with ‘S‘?" and: "Whose name begins with ‘F‘?" Or perhaps:
"Whose begins with ‘M‘?—with ‘Am‘?" And you yourself had to
be quick—witted enough to recognize that it was you he wanted
and offer yourself as a victim. This system was introduced to
prevent mistakes on the jailer‘s part. He might have called out a
name in the wrong cell, and that way we might have found out
who else was in prison. And yet, though cut off from the entire
prison, we were not deprived of news from other cells. Because
they tried to crowd in as many prisoners as possible, they shuffled
