First Cell, First Love | 235

Just before May 1 they took down the blackout shade on the
window. The war was perceptibly coming to an end.

That evening it was quieter than ever before in the Lubyanka.
It was, I remember, almost like the second day of Easter, since
May Day and Easter came one after the other that year. All the
interrogators were out in Moscow celebrating. No one was taken
to interrogation. In the silence we could hear someone across
the corridor protesting. They took him from the cell and into a
box. By listening, we could detect the location of all the doors.
They left the door of the box open, and they kept beating him a
long time. In the suspended silence every blow on his soft and
choking mouth could be heard clearly.

On May 2 a thirty—gun salute roared out. That meant a Euro—
pean capital. Only two had not yet been captured—Prague and
Berlin. We tried to guess which it was.

On the ninth of May they brought us our dinner at the same
time as our lunch—which was done at the Lubyanka only on
May 1 and November 7.

And that is how we guessed that the war had ended.

That evening they shot off another thirty—gun salute. We then
knew that there were no more capitals to be captured. And later
that same evening one more salute roared out—forty guns, I
seem to remember. And that was the end of all the ends.

Above the muzzle of our window, and from all the other cells
of the Lubyanka, and from all the windows of all the Moscow
prisons, we, too, former prisoners of war and former front—line
soldiers, watched the Moscow heavens, patterned with fireworks
and crisscrossed by the beams of searchlights.

Boris Gammerov, a young antitank man, already demobilized
because of wounds, with an incurable wound in his lung, having
been arrested with a group of students, was in prison that eve—
ning in an overcrowded Butyrki cell, where half the inmates were
former POW‘s and front—line soldiers. He described this last salute
of the war in a terse eight—stanza poem, in the most ordinary lan—
guage: how they were already lying down on their board bunks,
covered with their overcoats; how they were awakened hy the
