526 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

In general, those minutes of sitting on the ground there at
the station were among our very best. I remember that in Omsk
we were made to sit down on the railroad ties between two long
freight trains. No one from outside entered this alleyway. (In
all probability, they had stationed a soldier at either end: "You
can‘t go in there." And even in freedom our people are taught to
take orders from anyone in a uniform.) It began to grow dark.
It was August. The oily station gravel hadn‘t yet completely
cooled off from the sun and warmed us where we sat. We couldn‘t
see the station, but it was very close by, somewhere behind the
trains. A phonograph blared dance music, and the crowd buzzed
in unison. And for some reason it didn‘t seem humiliating to sit
on the ground in a crowded dirty mass in some kind of pen; and
it wasn‘t a mockery to hear the dances of young strangers, dances
we would never dance; to picture someone on the station platform
meeting someone or seeing someone off—maybe even with
flowers. It was twenty minutes of near—freedom: the twilight
deepened, the first stars began to shine, there were red and green
lights along the tracks, and the music kept playing. Life was
going on without us—and we didn‘t even mind any more.

Cherish such moments, and prison will become easier to bear.
Otherwise you will explode from rage.

And if it was dangerous to herd the zeks along to the Black
Maria because there were streets and people right next to them,
then the convoy statutes provided another good command: "Link
arms!" There was nothing humiliating in this—link arms! Old
men and boys, girls and old women, healthy people and cripples.
If one of your hands is hanging onto your belongings, your
neighbor puts his arm under that arm and you in turn link your
other arm with your other neighbor‘s. So you have now been
compressed twice as tightly as in ordinary formation, and you
have immediately become heavier and are hampered by being
thrown out of balance by your belongings and by your awkward—
ness with them, and you sway steadily as you limp. Dirty, gray,
clumsy creatures, you move ahead like blind men with an
ostensible tenderness for one another—a caricature of humanity.

It may well be that no Black Maria at all is there to fetch you.
And the chief of convoy is perhaps a coward. He is afraid he
will fail to deliver you safely—and in this state, weighed down,
