Tyurzak | 477

forces in a common struggle (let us recall in this connection the
escape from the Sevastopol Central Prison), in Soviet prisons
each political group tried to ensure its own purity by steering
clear of the others. The Trotskyites struggled on their own, apart
from the socialists and Communists; the Communists didn‘t
struggle at all, for how could one allow oneself to struggle against
one‘s own government and one‘s own prison?

It turned out in consequence that the Communists in isolators
and in prisons for long—termers were restricted earlier and more
cruelly than others. In 1928, in the Yaroslavl Central Prison,
the Communist Nadezhda Surovtseva went outdoors for fresh
air in a single—file column that was forbidden to engage in con—
versation, while the socialists were still chattering in their own
groups. She was not permitted to tend the flowers in the courtyard
—because they had been left by previous prisoners who had
struggled for their rights. And they deprived her of newspapers
too. (However, the Secret Political Department of the GPU
permitted her to have complete sets of Marx and Engels, Lenin
and Hegel in her cell.) Her mother‘s visit to her took place
virtually in the dark, and her downcast mother died soon after—
ward. (What must she have thought of her daughter‘s circum—
stances in prison?)

The difference between the treatment of socialist prisoners and
that of the Communists persisted many years, went far beyond
this, and extended to a difference in rewards: in 1937—1938 the
socialists were imprisoned like the rest and they all got their
tenners too. But, as a rule, they were not forced to denounce
themselves: they had, after all, never hidden their own, special,
individual views—which were quite enough to get them sen—
tenced. But a Communist had no special, individual views, so
what, then, was he to be sentenced for if a self—denunciation wasn‘t
forced out of him?

Even though the enormous Archipelago was already spreading
across the land, the prisons for long—termers didn‘t fall into decay.
The old jail tradition was being zealously carried on. Every—
thing new and invaluable which the Archipelago had contributed
to the indoctrination of the masses was still not enough in itself.
