Tyurzak | 469

had to moan and groan in order to receive those legitimate relief
parcels!) Overall, however, it was an insignificant victory and
paid for too dearly. Olitskaya recalls such foolish hunger strikes
on the part of others too: people starved up to twenty days in
order to get delivery of a parcel or a change of companions for
their outdoor walk. Was it worth it? After all, in the New Type
Prison one‘s strength, once lost, could not be restored. The
religious—sect member Koloskov fasted until he died on the
twenty—fifth day. Could one in general permit oneself to fast in
the New Type Prison? After all, the new prison heads, operating
in secrecy and silence, had acquired several powerful methods of
combating hunger strikes:

1. Patience on the part of the administration. (We have seen
enough of what this meant from preceding examples.)

2. Deception. This, too, can be practiced thanks to total
secrecy. When every step is reported by the newspapers, you
aren‘t going to do much deceiving. But in our country, why not?
In 1933, in the Khabarovsk Prison, S. A. Chebotaryev, demand—
ing that his family be informed of his whereabouts, fasted for
seventeen days. (He had come from the Chinese Eastern Railroad
in Manchuria and then suddenly disappeared, and he was worried
about what his wife might be thinking.) On the seventeenth day,
Zapadny, the Deputy Chief of the Provincial GPU, and the
Khabarovsk Province prosecutor (their ranks indicate that lengthy
hunger strikes were really not so frequent) came to see him and
showed him a telegraph receipt (There, they said, they had in—
formed his wife!), and thus persuaded him to take some broth.
_ And the receipt was a fake! (Why had these high—ranking officials
gone to this trouble? Not, certainly, for Chebotaryev‘s life. Evi—
dently, in the first half of the thirties there was still some sort of
personal responsibility on the part of higher—ups for long—drawn—
out hunger strikes.)

3. Forced artificial feeding. This method was adapted, with—
out any question, from experience with wild animals in captivity.
And it could be employed only in total secrecy. By 1937 arti—
ficial feeding was, evidently, already in wide use. For example,
in the group hunger strike of socialists in the Yaroslavl Central
Prison, artificial feeding was forced on everyone on the fifteenth
day.
