The Bluecaps | 145

stayed in it for more than an hour, attempting thereby to sense the
state of mind of those he had imprisoned there.

One cannot but admit that for a monarch this was evidence of
moral aspiration, to feel the need and make the effort to take a
spiritual view of the matter.

But it is impossible to picture any of our interrogators, right
up to Abakumov and Beria, wanting to slip into a prisoner‘s skin
even for one hour, or feeling compelled to sit and meditate in soli—
tary confinement.

Their branch of service does not require them to be educated
people of broad culture and broad views—and they are not. Their
branch of service does not require them to think logically—and
they do not. Their branch of service requires only that they carry
out orders exactly and be impervious to suffering—and that is
what they do and what they are. We who have passed through
their hands feel suffocated when we think of that legion, which is
stripped bare of universal human ideals.

Although others might not be aware of it, it was clear to the
interrogators at least that the cases were fabricated. Except at
staff conferences, they could not seriously say to one another or to
themselves that they were exposing criminals. Nonetheless they
kept right on producing depositions page after page to make sure
that we rotted. So the essence of it all turns out to be the credo of
the blatnye—the underworld of Russian thieves: "You today; me
tomorrow."

They understood that the cases were fabricated, yet they kept
on working year after year. How could they? Either they forced
themselves not to think (and this in itself means the ruin of a
human being), and simply accepted that this was the way it had
to be and that the person who gave them their orders was always
right ...

But didn‘t the Nazis, too, it comes to mind, argue that same way?*

1. There is no way of sidestepping this comparison: both the years and the
methods coincide too closely. And the comparison occurred even more naturally
to those who had passed through the hands of both the Gestapo and the MGB.
One of these was Yevgeny Ivanovich Divnich, an émigré and preacher of Ortho—
dox Christianity. The Gestapo accused him of Communist activitiee among
Russian workers in Germany, and the MGB charged him with having ties to
the international bourgeoisie. Divnich‘s verdict was unfavorable to the MGB.
He was tortured by both, but the Gestapo was nonetheless trying to get at the
truth, and when the accusation did not hold up, Divnich was released. The MGB

wasn‘t interested in the truth and had no intention of letting anyone out of
its grip once he was arrested.
