232 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

Pelageya, you have preserved your son," said the old man. And
he took the future Emperor aside, like a patriarch preparing to
enthrone him, and announced to the astonished young man that
in 1953 there would be a change in rule and that he would be—
come Emperor of All Russia." (That is why the number of our
cell, 53, shocked him so.) To this end, the old man told him,
he was to begin to gather his forces in 1948. The old man didn‘t
instruct him as to how to gather his forces. He departed, and
Viktor Alekseyevich didn‘t get around to asking.

All the peace and simplicity of his life were lost to him now.
Perhaps some other individual would have recoiled from the
ambitious program, but Viktor, as it happened, had rubbed
shoulders with the highest of the high. He had seen all those
Mikhailovs, Shcherbakovs, Sedins, and he had heard a lot from
other chauffeurs, too, and he had gotten it clear in his own mind
that nothing in the least unusual was required—in fact, just the
reverse.

The newly anointed Tsar, quiet, conscientious, sensitive, like
Fyodor Ivanovich, the last of the line of Ryurik, felt on his brow
the heavy pressure of the crown of Monomakh. All around him
were the people‘s poverty and grief, for which he had not until
now borne any responsibility. Now all this lay upon his shoulders,
and he was to blame for the fact that this misery still existed. It
seemed strange to him to wait until 1948, and, therefore, in that
very autumn of 1943, he wrote his first proclamation to the
Russian people and read it to four of his fellow workers in the
garage of the People‘s Commissariat of Petroleum.

We had surrounded Viktor Alekseyevich from early morning,
and he had meekly told us all this. We had still not fathomed his
childish trustfulness—we were absorbed in his unusual story and
—it was our fault—we forgot to warn him about the stoolie. In
fact, we never even thought for one minute that there was any—
thing in the nafve and simple story he had told us that the inter—
rogator didn‘t already know.

The instant the story ended, Kramarenko began demanding
to be taken either to the "chief of the prison for tobaceco" or else
to the doctor. At any rate, they summoned him quickly. And as
soon as he got there he put the finger on those four workers in

23. The prophetic old man made only one mistake. He confused the
chauffeur with his former employer.
