The Bluecaps | 149

even be mentioned. You are there; everyone feels your presence;
but it‘s as though you didn‘t exist. From the moment you don that
heavenly blue service cap, you stand higher than the publicly
acknowledged power. No one dares check up on what you do. But
no one is exempt from your checking up on him. And therefore,
in dealing with ordinary so—called citizens, who for you are mere
blocks of wood, it is altogether appropriate for you to wear an
ambiguous and deeply thoughtful expression. For, of course, you
are the one—and no one else—who knows about the special
considerations. And therefore you are always right.

There is just one thing you must never forget. You, too, would
have been just such a poor block of wood if you had not had the
luck to become one of the little links in the Organs—that flexible,
unitary organism inhabiting a nation as a tapeworm inhabits a
human body. Everything is yours now! Everything is for you!
Just be true to the Organs! They will always stand up for you!
They will help you swallow up anyone who bothers you! They
will help move every obstacle from your path! But—be true to the
Organs! Do everything they order you to! They will do the think—
ing for you in respect to your functions too: today you serve in
a special unit; tomorrow you will sit in an interrogator‘s armchair;
and then perhaps you will travel to Lake Seliger as a folklorist,*
partly, it may be, to get your nerves straightened out. And next
you may be sent from a city where you are too well known to the
opposite end of the country as a Plenipotentiary in Charge of
Church Affairs." Or perhaps you will become Executive Secretary
of the Union of Soviet Writers.© Be surprised at nothing. People‘s
true appointments and true ranks are known only to the Organs.
The rest is merely play—acting. Some Honored Artist or other, or
Hero of Socialist Agriculture, is here today, and tomorrow, puff!
he‘s gone."

The duties of an interrogator require work, of course: you have

4. Tlin in 1931.
5. The violent Yaroslavl interrogator Volkopyalov, appointed Plenipotentiary

in Charge of Church Affairs in Moldavia.

6. Another Tin—this one Viktor Nikolayevich, a former lieutenant general
of State Security.

7. "Who are you?" asked General Serov in Berlin of the world—renowned
biologist Timofeyev—Ressovsky, offensively using the familiar form of address.
And the scientist, who was undismayed and who possessed a Cossack‘s heredi—
tary daring, replied, using the same familiar form: "And who are you?" Serov
corrected himself and, this time using the formal and correct form, asked: "Are
you a scientist?"
