The Law Becomes a Man | 349

The Accuser: "How do you know that? Give us the name of
the priest who told you that. [And we will arrest him immedi—
ately!]"

The Patriarch does not give the name.

That means it was a lie!

The Accuser presses on triumphantly: "No, who spread that
repulsive slander?"

The Presiding Judge: "Give us the names of those who
trampled the ikon cover! [One can assume that after doing it they
left their visiting cards!] Otherwise the tribunal cannot believe
you!"

The Patriarch cannot name them.

The Presiding Judge: "That means you have made an unsub—
stantiated assertion."

It still remained to be proved that the Patriarch wanted to
overthrow the Soviet government. And here is how it was proved:
"Propaganda is an attempt to prepare a mood preliminary to
preparing a revolt in the future."

The tribunal ordered criminal charges to be brought against
the Patriarch.

On May 7 sentence was pronounced: of the seventeen defen—
dants, eleven were to be shot. (They actually shot five.)

As Krylenko said: "We didn‘t come here just to crack jokes."

One week later the Patriarch was removed from office and
arrested. (But this was not the very end. For the time being he
was taken to the Donskoi Monastery and kept there in strict in—
carceration, so that the believers would grow accustomed to his
absence. Remember how just a short while before Krylenko had
been astonished: what danger could possibly threaten the Patri—
arch? Truly, when the danger really does come, there‘s no help
for it, either in alarm bells or in telephone calls.)

Two weeks after that, the Metropolitan Veniamin was arrested
in Petrograd. He had not been a high official of the church before
the Revolution. Nor had he even been appointed, like almost all
Metropolitans. In the spring of 1917, for the first time since the
days of ancient Novgorod the Great, they had elected a Metro—
politan in Moscow and in Petrograd. A gentle, simple, easily
accessible man, a frequent visitor in factories and mills, popular
with the people and with the lower clergy, Veniamin had been
