180 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

your term! It is difficult even to count them. And in each one
there were people, people. There might be two people in one,
150 in another. You were imprisoned for five minutes in one
and all summer long in another.

But in every case, out of all the cells you‘ve been in, your first
cell is a very special one, the place where you first encountered
others like yourself, doomed to the same fate. All your life you
will remember it with an emotion that you otherwise experience
only in remembering your first love. And those people, who
shared with you the floor and air of that stone cubicle during
those days when you rethought your entire life, will from time to
time be recollected by you as members of your own family.

Yes, in those days they were your only family.

_ What you experience in your first interrogation cell parallels
nothing in your entire previous life or your whole subsequent
life. No doubt prisons have stood for thousands of years before
you came along, and may continue to stand after you too—
longer than one would like to think—but that first interrogation
cell is unique and inimitable.

Maybe it was a terrible place for a human being. A lice—laden,
bedbug—infested lock—up, without windows, without ventilation,
without bunks, and with a dirty floor, a box called a KPZ‘ in the
village soviet, at the police station, in the railroad station, or in
some port. (The KPZ‘s and the DPZ‘s are scattered across the
face of our land in the greatest abundance. There are masses of
prisoners in them.) Or maybe it was "solitary" in the Archangel
prison, where the glass had been smeared over with red lead so
that the only rays of God‘s maimed light which crept in to you
were crimson, and where a 15—watt bulb burned constantly in the
ceiling, day and night. Or "solitary" in the city of Choibalsan,
where, for six months at a time, fourteen of you were crowded
onto seven square yards of floor space in such a way that you
could only shift your bent legs in unison. Or it was one of the
Lefortovo "psychological" cells, like No. 111, which was painted
black and also had a day—and—night 25—watt bulb, but was in all
other respects like every other Lefortovo cell: asphalt floor; the
heating valve out in the corridor where only the guards had access

1. KPZ = Cell for Preliminary Detention. DPZ = House of Preliminary
Detention. In other words, where interrogations are conducted, not where
sentences are served.
