The Law as a Child | 321

now, you are going to replace it, and where are the Chekists
supposed to go? Ominous days! That was reason enough to hurry
to the tribunal, in a greatcoat down to one‘s heels, to testify as a
witness.

But perhaps your sources of information, Comrade Krylenko,
are false?

Yes, the heavens darkened over the Lubyanka in those days.
And this whole book might have been very different. But I sup—
pose that what happened was that iron Feliks Dzerzhinsky went
to see Vladimir Iyich Lenin, and talked it over and explained.
And the skies cleared. And although two days later, on Feb—
ruary 17, 1919, the Cheka was deprived of its judicial rights by
special decree of the All—Russian Central Executive Committee—
it was "not for long."*"

Our day in court was further complicated by the fact that the
objectionable Uspenskaya behaved abominably. From the de—
fendants‘ bench she "threw mud at" leading Chekists who had
not previously been touched by the trial, including Comrade
Peters! (She turned out to have used his pure name in her black—
mailing operations; she used to sit right in his office, without
any ceremony, during his conversations with other intelligence
agents.) Now she hinted at some dark prerevolutionary past of
his in Riga. That‘s the kind of snake she had turned into in eight
months, despite the fact that she had been with Chekists during
those eight months! What was to be done with such a woman?
Here Krylenko‘s position jibed completely with that of the
Chekists: "Until a firm regime has been established, and we are a
long way from. that being the case [Are we really???] . . . in the
interests of the defense of the Revolution . . . there is not and
cannot be any sentence for citizeness Uspenskaya other than her
annihilation." He did not say "to be shot"—what he said was
"annihilation"! But after all, Citizen Krylenko, she‘s just a young
girl! Come on now, give her a "tenner," or maybe a "twenty—
five," and maybe the system will be firmly established by then?
How about it? But alas: "In the interests of society and of the
Revolution there is no other answer, nor can there be one—and
the question cannot be put any other way. In the given case,
detention isn‘t going to bear any fruit!"

47. Ibid., p. 14.
