142 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

commentators (like Captain Libin). I saw the hyperbolized lie
in which Captain Yezepov had wrapped up my careful testimony.
And, last but not least, I saw the idiocy whereby I, one individual,
was accused as a "group"!

"I won‘t sign," I said, without much firmness. "You conducted
the interrogation improperly."

"All right then, let‘s begin it all over again!" Maliciously he
compressed his lips. "We‘ll send you off to the place where we
keep the Polizei."

He even stretched out his hand as though to take the file away
from me. (At that point I held onto it.)

Somewhere outside the fifth—floor windows of the Lubyanka,
the golden sunset sun glowed. Somewhere it was May. The office
windows, like all the windows facing outward, were tightly closed
and had not yet been unsealed after the winter—so that fresh
air and the fragrance of things in bloom should not creep into
those hidden rooms. The bronze clock on the mantel, from which
the last rays of the sun had disappeared, quietly chimed.

Begin all over again? It seemed to me it would be easier to
die than to begin all over again. Ahead of me loomed at least
some kind of life. (If I had only known what kind!) And then
what about that place where they kept the Polizei? And, in
general, it was a bad idea to make him angry. It would influence
the tone in which he phrased the conclusion of the indictment.
.___And so I signed. I signed it complete with Section 11, the

significance of which I did not then know. They told me only
that it would not add to my prison term. But because of that Sec—
tion 11 I was later put into a hard—labor camp. Because of that
Section 11 I was sent, even after "liberation," and without any
additional sentence, into eternal exile.

Maybe it was all for the best. Without both those experiences,
I would not have written this book.

My interrogator had used no methods on me other than sleep—
lessness, lies, and threats—all completely legal. Therefore, in
the course of the ©206" procedure, he didn‘t have to shove at me
—as did interrogators who had made a mess of things and wanted
to play safe—a document on nondisclosure for me to sign: that
I, the undersigned, under pain of.criminal penalty; swore never to
