First Cell, First Love | 207

vanished for good! Those born in 1930 would never know what
bread is. Friends, this is a forbidden subject! We agreed not to
say one word about food.

Once again there was movement in the corridor—tea was being
brought around. A new young tough in a gray smock carrying
pails. We put our teapot out in the corridor and he poured
straight into it from a pail without a spout—into the teapot and
onto the runner and the floor beneath it. And the whole corridor
was polished like that of a first—class hotel."

And that was all they gave us. Whatever cooked food we got
would be served at 1 P.M. and at 4 p.mM., one meal almost on the
heels of the other. You could then spend the next twenty—one
hours remembering it. (And that wasn‘t prison brutality either: it
was simply a matter of the kitchen staff having to do its work as
quickly as possible and leave.)

At nine o‘clock the morning check—up took place. For a long
while beforehand, we could hear especially loud turns of the key
and particularly sharp knocks on the doors. Then one of the duty
lieutenants for the whole floor would march forward and enter,
almost as erect as if he were standing at attention. He would take
two steps forward and look sternly at us. We would be on our
feet. (We didn‘t even dare remember that political prisoners were
once not required to rise.) It was no work at all to count us——
he could do it in a glance—but this was a moment for testing our
rights. For we did have some rights, after all, although we did not
really know them, and it was his job to hide them from us. The
whole strength of the Lubyanka training showed itself in a totally
machinelike manner: no expression on the face, no inflection, not
a superfluous word.

And which of our rights did we know about? A request to have
our shoes repaired. An appointment with the doctor. Although
if they actually took you to the doctor, you would not be happy

16. Soon the biologist Timofeyev—Ressovsky, whom I have already men—
tioned, would be brought here from Berlin. There was nothing at the Lubyanka,
it appeared, which so offended him as this spilling on the floor. He considered it
striking evidence of the lack of professional pride on the part of the jailers,
and of all of us in our chosen work. He multiplied the 27 years of Lubyanka‘s
existence as a prison by 730 times (twice for each day of the year), and then
by 111 cells—and he would seethe for a long time because it was easier to
spill boiling water on the floor 2,188,000 times and then come and wipe it up
with a rag the same number of times than to make pails with spouts.
