Tyurzak | 463

the Solovetsky Camp, Eichmans,° announced that new instruc—
tions had indeed been received regarding the regimen. They
wouldn‘t, of course, take everything away, not by any means!
They would cut down on correspondence, and then on something
else, too, and, as the most keenly felt measure of the lot, from
that day on, December 20, 1923, the right to go in and out of
prison buildings twenty—four hours a day would be curtailed—
limited to the daylight hours up to 6 P.M.

The party fractions decided to protest, and the SR‘s and An—
archists called for volunteers: on the first day of the new pro—
hibition they would go outside exactly at 6 P.M. But, as it turned
out, Nogtyev, the chief of the Savvatyevsky Monastery Prison,
had such an itchy trigger finger that even before the appointed
hour of 6 (and maybe their watches showed different times; after
all, there was no checking it by radio in those days), the guards
entered the compound with rifles and opened fire on the prisoners
there, who were out of doors quite legally. Three volleys killed
six and critically wounded three.

The next day Eichmans himself showed up: there had been an
unfortunate misunderstanding. Nogtyev was removed (trans—
ferred and promoted). A funeral was held for the victims. They
sang in chorus across the Solovetsky wilderness:

You fell a victim in a fateful fray.

(Was not this perhaps the last occasion when that long—drawn—out
melody was permitted for newly dead victims?) They pushed a
great boulder onto the common grave and carved on it the names
of those who had been killed.®

One cannot say that the press concealed this event. Pravda,
for example, carried a report in small type: the prisoners had
attacked the convoy, and six had been killed. The honest news—
paper Rote Fahne reported revolt on Solovki.‘®

8. How like Eichmann, is it not?

9. In 1925 the stone was overturned, and the names on it were thus buried
too. Any of you who clamber about Solovki—seek it out and gaze upon it!

10. One of the SR‘s in the Savvatyevsky Monastery was Yuri Podbelsky.
He collected the medical documents on the Solovetsky massacre—for publica—
tion at some future date. But a year later, at the Sverdlovsk Transit Prison,
they discovered a false bottom in his suitcase and confiscated the material he‘d
hidden. And that is how Russian history stumbles and falls.
