The Bluecaps | 157

Yagoda took one such school of fish along with him. No doubt
many of those whose glorious names we shall come to admire
when we come to the White Sea Canal were taken in this school
and their names thenceforward expunged from the poetic eulogies.

Very shortly, a second school accompanied the short—lived
Yezhov. Some of the finest cavaliers of 1937 vanished in this one.
(Yet one ought not to exaggerate their number. It did not by any
means include all the best.) Yezhov himself was beaten during
his interrogation. He was pitiful. And Gulag was orphaned dur—
ing this wave of arrests. For example, arrested with Yezhov were
the Chief of the Financial Administration of Gulag, the Chief of
the Medical Administration of Gulag, the Chief of the Guard
Service of Gulag (VOKhR),"° and even the Chief of the Security
Operations Department of Gulag, who oversaw the work of the
camp "godfathers."

And later there was the school of Beria.

The corpulent, conceited Abakumov had fallen earlier, sepa—
rately.

Someday—if the archives are not destroyed—the historians
of the Organs will recount all this step by step, with all the figures
and all the glittering names.

Therefore, I am going to write only briefly about Ryumin and
Abakumov, a story I learned only by chance. I will not repeat
what I have already written about them in The First Circle.

Ryumin had been raised to the heights by Abakumov and was
very close to him. At the end of 1952, he came to Abakumov with
the sensational report that Professor Etinger, a physician, had
confessed to intentional malpractice when treating Zhdanov and
Shcherbakov, with the purpose of killing them. Abakumov re—
fused to believe him. He knew the whole cookery and decided
Ryumin was getting too big for his britches. (But Ryumin had a
better idea of what Stalin wanted!) To verify the story, they
arranged to cross—question Etinger that very evening. But each
of them drew different conclusions from his testimony. Abakumov
concluded that there was no such thing as a "doctors‘ case." And
Ryumin concluded that there was. A second attempt at verifica—
tion was to take place the following morning, but, thanks to the
miraculous attributes of the Nighttime Institution, Etinger died

16. VOKhR: Militarized Guard Service, formerly the Internal Guard Service
of the Republic.
