Arrest | 7

even finished buttoning his trousers. During the arrest and search
it is highly improbable that a crowd of potential supporters will
gather at the entrance. The unhurried, step—by—step visits, first to
one apartment, then to another, tomorrow to a third and a fourth,
provide an opportunity for the Security operations personnel to
be deployed with the maximum efficiency and to imprison
many more citizens of a given town than the police force itself
numbers.

In addition, there‘s an advantage to night arrests in that neither
the people in neighboring apartment houses nor those on the city
streets can see how many have been taken away. Arrests which
frighten the closest neighbors are no event at all to those farther
away. It‘s as if they had not taken place. Along that same asphalt
ribbon on which the Black Marias scurry at night, a tribe of
youngsters strides by day with banners, flowers, and gay, un—
troubled songs.

But those who take, whose work consists solely of arrests, for
whom the horror is boringly repetitive, have a much broader un—
derstanding of how arrests operate. They operate according to a
large body of theory, and innocence must not lead one to ignore
this. The science of arrest is an important segment of the course
on general penology and has been propped up with a substantial
body of social theory. Arrests are classified according to various
criteria: nighttime and daytime; at home, at work, during a
journey; first—time arrests and repeats; individual and group
arrests. Arrests are distinguished by the degree of surprise
required, the amount of resistance expected (even though in tens
of millions of cases no resistance was expected and in fact there
was none). Arrests are also differentiated by the thoroughness of
the required search;* by instructions either to make out or not to

4. And there is a separate Science of Searches too. I have had the chance
to read a pamphlet on this subject for correspondence—school law students in
Alma—Ata. Its author praises highly those police officials who in the course of
their searches went so far as to turn over two tons of manure, eight cubic
yards of firewood, or two loads of hay; cleaned the snow from an entire
collective—farm vegetable plot, dismantled brick ovens, dug up cesspools,
checked out toilet bowls, looked into doghouses, chicken coops, birdhouses,
tore apart mattresses, ripped adhesive tape off people‘s bodies and even tore
out metal teeth in the search for microfilm. Students were advised to begin
and to end with a body search (during the course of the search the arrested
person might have grabbed up something that had already been examined).
They were also advised to return to the site of a search at a different time of
day and carry out the search all over again.
