First Cell, First Love | 185

pale faces, seemed to me so human, so dear, that I stood there,
hugging my mattress, and smiled with happiness. And they
smiled. And what a forgotten look that was—after only one
week!

"Are you from freedom?" they asked me. (That was the
question customarily put to a newcomer.)

"No00," I replied. And that was a newcomer‘s usual first reply.

They had in mind that I had probably been arrested recently,
which meant that I came from freedom. And I, after ninety—six
hours of interrogation, hardly considered that I was from "free—
dom." Was I not already a veteran prisoner? Nonetheless I was
from freedom. The beardless old man with the black and very
lively eyebrows was already asking me for military and political
news. Astonishing! Even though it was late February, they knew
nothing about the Yalta Conference, nor the encirclement of
East Prussia, nor anything at all about our own attack below
Warsaw in mid—January, nor even about the woeful December
retreat of the Allies. According to regulations, those under inter—
rogation were not supposed to know anything about the outside
world. And here indeed they didn‘t!

I was prepared to spend half the night telling them all about
it—with pride, as though all the victories and advances were the
work of my own hands. But at this point the duty jailer brought
in my cot, and I had to set it up without making any noise. I
was helped by a young fellow my own age, also a military man.
His tunic and aviator‘s cap hung on his cot. He had asked me,
even before the old man spoke, not for news of the war but for
tobacco. But although I felt openhearted toward my new friends,
and although not many words had been exchanged in the few
minutes since I joined them, I sensed something alien in this
front—line soldier who was my contemporary, and, as far as he
was concerned, I clammed up immediately and forever.

(I had not yet even heard the word "nasedka"—"stool pigeon"
—nor learned that there had to be one such "stool pigeon" in
each cell. And I had not yet had time to think things over and
conclude that I did not like this fellow, Georgi Kramarenko. But
a spiritual relay, a sensor relay, had clicked inside me, and it had
closed him off from me for.good and all. I would not bother to
recall this event if it had been the only one of its kind. But soon,
