The Ships of the Archipelago | 513

Our train! And what does that prove? Nothing so far. The middle
Volga area is still open, and the South Urals. And Kazakhstan
with the Dzhezkazgan copper mines. And Taishet, with its factory
for creosoting railroad ties (where, they say, creosote penetrates
the skin and bones and its vapors fill the lungs—and that is
death). All Siberia is still open to us—all the way to Sovetskaya
Gavan. The Kolyma too. And Norilsk.

And if it is wintertime, the car is battened down and the loud—
speakers are inaudible. If the convoy guards obey their regula—
tions, then you‘ll hear nary a whisper from them about the route
either. And thus we set out, and, entangled in other bodies, fall
asleep to the clacking of the wheels without knowing whether we
will see forest or steppe through the window tomorrow. Through
that window in the corridor. From the middle shelf, through the
grating, the corridor, the two windowpanes, and still another grat—
ing, you can still see some switching tracks and a piece of open
space hurtling by the train. If the windowpanes have not frosted
over, you can sometimes even read the names of the stations—
some Avsyunino or Undol. Where are these stations? No one in
the compartment knows. Sometimes you can judge from the sun
whether you are being taken north or east. Or at some place
called Tufanovo, they might shove some dilapidated nonpolitical
offender into your compartment, and he would tell you he was
being taken to Danilov to be tried and was scared he‘d get a
couple of years. In this way you would find out that you‘d gone
through Yaroslavl that night, which meant that the first transit
prison on your route would be Vologda. And some know—it—alls
in the compartment would savor gloomily the famous flourish,
stressing all the "o‘s," of the Vologda guards: "The Vologda con—
voy guards don‘t joke!"

But even after figuring out the general direction, you still
haven‘t really found out anything: transit prisons lie in clusters
on your route, and you can be shunted off to one side or another
from any one of them. You don‘t fancy Ukhta, nor Inta, nor
Vorkuta. But do you think that Construction Project 501—a
railroad in the tundra, crossing northern Siberia—is any sweeter?
It is worse than any of them.

Five years after the war, when the waves of prisoners had
finally settled within the river banks (or perhaps they had merely
