The Ports of the Archipelago | 549

remembered it.) The gray prisoners on the lower bunks were my
own brothers, 58—1b, the POW‘s. Had I not just a short while ago
sworn to assume the burden of their fate? And then I had shunted
them off under the bunks. True, they hadn‘t done anything to
defend us against the thieves. But why should they have fought
for our fat bacon if we ourselves didn‘t? They had had enough
cruel fights back in POW camps to destroy their faith in decency.
But they hadn‘t done me any harm, and I had them.

And thus it is that we have to keep getting banged on flank
and snout again and again so as to become, in time at least,
human beings, yes, human beings. . ..

But even for the newcomer whom the transit prison cracks open
and shucks, it is very, very necessary. It gives him some gradual
preparation for camp life. Such a change all in one step would be
more than the heart could bear. His consciousness would be un—
able to orient itself in that murk all at once. It has to happen
gradually.

Then, too, the transit prison gave the prisoner the semblance
of communicating with home. It was there he wrote the first
letter he was permitted to: reporting that he hadn‘t been shot and,
sometimes, the direction of his prisoner transport, and these were
always the first unfamiliar words home of a man who had been
plowed over by interrogation. At home they continued to re—
member him as he had been, but he would never be that person
again. And that could suddenly, like a stroke of lightning, become
apparent in one or another clumsily written line. Clumsily written
because, even though letters could be sent from transit prisons,
and there was a mailbox in the yard, it was impossible to get
either paper or pencils—or anything to sharpen a pencil with.
However, a makhorka wrapper or one from a sugar packet could
turn up and be smoothed out, and someone in the cell would have
a pencil—and so lines would be written in an undecipherable
scrawl which would determine the family‘s future peace or dis—
cord.

Women driven out of their minds by receiving such a letter
would sometimes precipitately rush off and try to get to their
