548 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

Getting to my feet, I turned to their senior, the pakhan, the
ringleader of the thieves. All the stolen victuals were there in front
of him beside the window on the second tier of bunks: the juvenile
rats hadn‘t eaten a thing themselves. They were disciplined.
Nature had sculpted the front part of the ringleader‘s head, in
bipeds usually called a face, with nausea and hate. Or perhaps it
had come to be what it was from living the life of a beast of prey.
It sagged crookedly and loosely, with a low forehead, a savage
scar, and modern steel crowns on the front teeth. His little eyes
were exactly large enough to see all familiar objects and yet not
take delight in the beauties of the world. He looked at me as a
boar looks at a deer, knowing he could always knock me off
my feet.

He was waiting. And what did I do? Leap forward to smash
my fist in that ugly mug at least once and then go down in the
aisle? Alas, I did not.

Am I a scoundrel? Until that moment I had always thought
that I wasn‘t. But now, plundered and humiliated, I found it
offensive to get down flat on my stomach again and crawl back
beneath the bunks. And so I addressed the ringleader of the
thieves indignantly and told him that since he had taken our food
away from us he might at least give us a place on the bunks.
(Now just tell me, wasn‘t that a natural complaint for a city
dweller and an officer?)

And what happened then? The ringleader of the thieves agreed.
After all, I was thereby surrendering any claim to the fat bacon;
and I was thereby recognizing his superior authority; and I was
revealing a point of view in common with his—he, too, would
have driven off the weakest. And he gave orders for two of the
gray neutrals to get off the lower bunks beside the window and
free a space for us. They obeyed submissively. And we lay down
in the best places. For a while we still grieved over our loss. (The
thieves paid no attention to my military breeches. They weren‘t
their kind of uniform. But one of the thieves was already fingering
Valentin‘s woolen trousers. He liked them.) And it was only at
night that the reproachful whisper of our neighbors reached us:
how could we ask the thieves to help us by driving two of our own
people under the bunks in our place? And only then did aware—
ness of my own meanness prick my conscience and make me
blush. (And for many years thereafter I blushed every time I
