394 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

of them at once: the émigré industrialists had published an
article abroad to the effect that they had held no talks at all with
Ramzin and Larichevy and knew nothing whatever about any
Promparty, and that the testimony of the witnesses had in all
likelihood been forced from them by torture. Well, what are you
going to say to that?

Good Lord! How outraged the defendants were! They
clamored for the floor without waiting their turns. What had
become of that weary calm with which they had humiliated
themselves and their colleagues for seven days? Boiling indigna—
tion at those émigrés burst from them. They demanded permis—
sion to send a written declaration to the newspapers in defense of
GPU methods. (Now, wasn‘t that an embellishment? Wasn‘t
that a jewel?) And Ramzin declared: "Our presence here is
sufficient proof that we were not subjected to tortures and tor—
ments!" (And what, pray tell, would be the use of tortures that
made it impossible for the defendants to appear in court!) And
Fedotov: "Imprisonment did me good and not only me. . . . I
even feel befter in prison than in freedom." And Ochkin: "Me
too. I feel better too!"

It was out of sheer generosity that Krylenko and Vyshinsky
declined their offer of a collective declaration. They certainly
would have written one! And they certainly would have signed
it!

But maybe someone had some lingering suspicions still? Well,
in that case, Comrade Krylenko vouchsafed them a flash of his
brilliant logic. "If we should admit even for one second that
these people were telling untruths, then why were they arrested
and why did they all at once start babbling their heads off?""*

Now that is the power of logic for you! For a thousand years
prosecutors and accusers had never even imagined that the fact
of arrest might in itself be a proof of guilt. If the defendants
were innocent, then why had they been arrested? And once they
had been arrested, that meant they were guilty!

And, indeed, why had they started babbling away?

"The question of torture we discard! . . . But let us put the
question psychologically: Why did they confess? And I ask you:
W hat else could they have done?""*

23. Ibid., p. 452.
24. Ibid., p. 454.
