6 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

arrested, they grabbed Tangut manuscripts—and twenty—five
years later the deceased victim was posthumously awarded a
Lenin Prize for deciphering them. From Karger they took his
archive of the Yenisei Ostyaks and vetoed the alphabet and
vocabulary he had developed for this people—and a small na—
tionality was thereby left without any written language. It would
take a long time to describe all this in educated speech, but there‘s
a folk saying about the search which covers the subject: They are
looking for something which was never put there. They carry off
whatever they have seized, but sometimes they compel the
arrested individual to carry it. Thus Nina Aleksandrovna Pal—
chinskaya hauled over her shoulder a bag filled with the papers
and letters of her eternally busy and active husband, the late
great Russian engineer, carrying it into their maw—once and
for all, forever. .

For those left behind after the arrest there is the long tail end
of a wrecked and devastated life. And the attempts to go and
deliver food parcels. But from all the windows the answer comes
in barking voices: "Nobody here by that name!" "Never heard
of him!" Yes, and in the worst days in Leningrad it took five
days of standing in crowded lines just to get to that window. And
it may be only after half a year—or a year that the arrested person
responds at all. Or else the answer is tossed out: "Deprived of the
right to correspond." And that means once and for all. "No right
to correspondence"—and that almost for certain means: "Has
been shot."* .

That‘s how we picture arrest to ourselves.

The kind of night arrest described is, in fact, a favorite, be—
cause it has important advantages. Everyone living in the apart—
ment is thrown into a state of terror by the first knock at the door.
The arrested person is torn from the warmth of his bed. He is in
a daze, half—asleep, helpless, and his judgment is befogged. In a
night arrest the State Security men have a superiority in numbers;
there are many of them, armed, against one person who hasn‘t

3. In other words, "We live in the cursed conditions in which a human
being can disappear into the void and even his closest relatives, his mother and
his wife . . . do not know for years what has become of him." Is that right
or not? That is what Lenin wrote in 1910 in his obituary of Babushkin. But
let‘s speak frankly: Babushkin was transporting arms for an uprising, and was
caught with them when he was shot. He knew what he was doing. You couldn‘t
say that about helpless rabbits like us.
