The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 31

left. In 1919 they arrested all the members of the SR Central
Committee they could catch—and kept them imprisoned in the
Butyrki up to the time of their trial in 1922. In that same year,
Latsis, a leading Chekist, wrote of the Mensheviks: "People of
this sort are more than a mere hindrance to us. That is why we
remove them from our path, so they won‘t get under our feet. . . .
We put them away in a secluded, cozy place, in the Butyrki, and
we are going to keep them there until the struggle between
capital and labor comes to an end."" In 1919, also, the delegates
to the Non—Party Workers Congress were arrested; as a result,
the Congress never took place.°

In 1919, suspicion of our Russians returning from abroad was
already having its effect (Why? What was their alleged assign—
ment?)—thus the officers of the Russian expeditionary force in
France were imprisoned on their homecoming.

In 1919, too, what with the big hauls in connection with such
actual and pseudo plots as the "National Center" and the "Mili—
tary Plot," executions were carried out in Moscow, Petrograd,
and other cities on the basis of lists—in other words, free people
were simply arrested and executed immediately, and right and
left those elements of the intelligentsia considered close to the
Cadets were raked into prison. (What does the term "close to
the Cadets" mean? Nof monarchist and not socialist: in other
words, all scientific circles, all university circles, all artistic, liter—
ary, yes, and, of course, all engineering circles. Except for the
extremist writers, except for the theologians and theoreticians
of socialism, all the rest of the intelligentsia, 80 percent of it,
was "close to the Cadets.") In that category, for example, Lenin
placed the writer Korolenko—‘"a pitiful petty bourgeois, im—
prisoned in bourgeois prejudices.""" He considered it was "not
amiss" for such "talents" to spend a few weeks in prison."
From Gorky‘s protests we learn of individual groups that were
arrested. On September 15, 1919, Lenin replied to him: "It
is clear to us that there were some mistakes." But: "What a

8. M. I. Latsis, Dva Goda Borby na Vnutrennom Fronte; Populyarni Obzor
Deyatelnosti ChK (Two Years of Struggle on the Home Front; Popular Review
of the Activity of the Cheka), Moscow, GIZ, 1920, p. 61.

9, Ibid., p. 60.

10. Lenin, fifth edition, Vol. 51, pp. 47, 48.

11. Ibid., p. 48.
