184 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

"We demand!" Or: "We swear!"), is now revealed to you as
something sweet: you are not alone in the world! Wise, spiritual
beings—Ahuman beings—still exist.

I had been dueling for four days with the interrogator, when the
jailer, having waited until I lay down to sleep in my blindingly
lit box, began to unlock my door. I heard him all right, but
before he could say: "Get up! Interrogation!" I wanted to lie for
another three—hundredths of a second with my head on the pillow
and pretend I was sleeping. But, instead of the familiar command,
the guard ordered: "Get up! Pick up your bedding!"
Uncomprehending, and unhappy because this was my most
precious time, I wound on my footcloths, put on my boots, my
overcoat, my winter cap, and clasped the government—issue mat—
tress in my arms. The guard was walking on tiptoe and kept
signaling me not to make any noise as he led me down a corridor
silent as the grave, through the fourth floor of the Lubyanka, past
the desk of the section supervisor, past the shiny numbers on the
cells and the olive—colored covers of the peepholes, and unlocked
Cell 67. I entered and he locked it behind me immediately.
Even though only a quarter of an hour or so had passed since
the signal to go to sleep had been given, the period allotted the
prisoners for sleeping was so fragile, and undependable, and brief
that, by the time I arrived, the inhabitants of Cell 67 were already
asleep on their metal cots with their hands on top of the blankets.®
At the sound of the door opening, all three started and raised
their heads for an instant. They, too, were waiting to learn which
of them might be taken to interrogation.
And those three lifted heads, those three unshaven, crumpled
5. New measures of oppression, additions to the traditional prison regula—
tions, were invented only gradually in the internal prisons of the GPU—NKVD—
MGB. At the beginning of the twenties, prisoners were not subjected to this
particular measure, and lights were turned off at night as in the ordinary world.
But they began to keep the lights on, on the logical grounds that they needed
to keep the prisoners in view at all times. (When they used to turn the lights
on for inspection, it had been even worse.) Arms had to be kept outside the
blanket, allegedly to prevent the prisoner from strangling himself beneath the
blanket and thus escaping his just interrogation. It was demonstrated experi—

mentally that in the winter a human being always wants to keep his arms under
the bedclothes for warmth; consequently the measure was made permanent.
