280 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

quently, laughter resounded in the box. We were laughing be—
cause everything had gone off so smoothly. We were laughing
at the shocked bookkeeper. We were laughing at our morning
hopes and at the way our cellmates had seen us off and arranged
secret signals with us to be transmitted via food parcels—four
potatoes or two bagels!

"Well, anyway, there is going to be an amnesty!" several af—
firmed. "All this is just for form‘s sake and it doesn‘t mean any—
thing. They want to give us a good scare so we‘ll keep in line.
Stalin told an American correspondent—"

"What was his name?"

"I don‘t remember his name."

So they ordered us to take our things, formed us up by twos,
and led us once again through that same marvelous little park
filled with summer. And where did they take us? Once again to
the baths.

And, oh, what a peal of laughter that got! My God, what silly
nincompoops! Still roaring, we undressed, hung our duds on the
same trolley hooks and rolled them into the same roaster they‘d
already been rolled into that very morning. Roaring, each of us
took a small sliver of repulsive soap and went into the spacious,
resonant shower room to wash off our girlish gaiety. We splashed
about in there, pouring hot clean water on ourselves, and we got
to romping about as if we were school kids who had come to the
baths after their last exam. This cleansing, relieving laughter
was, I think, not really sick but a living defense for the salvation
of the organism.

As we dried ourselves off, Valentin said to me, reassuringly,
intimately: "Well, all right. We are still young. We are going to
live a long time yet. The main thing is not to make a misstep now.
We are going to a camp—and we‘ll not say one word to anyone,
so they won‘t plaster new terms on us. We will work honestly—
and keep our mouths shut."

And he really believed in his program, that naive little kernel
of grain caught between Stalin‘s millstones! He really had his
hopes set on it. One wanted to agree with him, to serve out the
term cozily, and then expunge from one‘s head what one had
lived through.

But I had begun to sense a truth inside myself: if in order to
live it is necessary not to live, then what‘s it all for?
