612 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

"Well, that‘s hypocrisy, of course."

And suddenly the young man‘s yellowish brows trembled, his
pale lips pursed, he seemed to draw himself up, and he asked me:
"Why? Why do you not admit the possibility that a political leader
might sincerely believe in God?"

And that is all that was said! But what a direction the attack
had come from! To hear such words from someone born in 1923?
I could have replied to him very firmly, but prison had already
undermined my certainty, and the principal thing was that some
kind of clean, pure feeling does live within us, existing apart from
all our convictions, and right then it dawned upon me that I had
not spoken out of conviction but because the idea had been im—
planted in me from outside. And because of this I was unable to
reply to him, and I merely asked him: "Do you believe in God?"

"Of course," he answered tranquilly.

Of course? Of course . . . Yes, yes. The Komsomols were flying
ahead of the flock—everywhere, but so far only the NKGB had
noticed.

Notwithstanding his youth, Borya Gammerov had not only
fought as a sergeant in an antitank unit with those antitank 45‘s
the soldiers had christened "Farewell, Motherland!" He had also
been wounded in the lungs and the wound had not yet healed,
and because of this TB had set in. Gammerov was given a medical
discharge from the army and enrolled in the biology department
of Moscow University. And thus two strands intertwined in him:
one from his life as a soldier and the other from the by no means
foolish and by no means dead students‘ life at war‘s end. A circle
formed of those who thought and reasoned about the future (even
though no one had given them any instructions to do so), and the
experienced eye of the Organs singled out three of them and
pulled them in. (In 1937, Gammerov‘s father had been killed in
prison or shot, and his son was hurrying along the same path.
During the interrogation he had read several of his own verses to
the interrogator with feeling. And I deeply regret that I have
not managed to remember even one of them, and there is nowhere
to seek them out today. Otherwise I would have cited them
here.)

For a number of months after that my path crossed those of all
three codefendants: right there in a Butyrki cell I met Vyacheslav
D.—and there is always someone like him when young people
