The Law Matures | 421

head of the District Consumer Cooperatives, Vasily Grigoryevich
Vlasov, a man with a ragtag, haphazard education but one of
those native talents others are so surprised to find among Russians,
a born retail trade executive, eloquent, adroit in an argument,
who could get fired to red heat about anything he believed to be
right, tried to persuade the Party meeting to expel Romanov from
the Party for slander. And they actually did give Romanov an
official Party rebuke! Romanov‘s last words in this dispute were
typical of this kind of person, demonstrating his assurance in
regard to the general situation: "Even though they proved Stavrov
was not a Trotskyite, nonetheless I am sure he is a Trotskyite. The
Party will investigate, and it will also investigate the rebuke to
me." And the Party did investigate: the District NKVD arrested
Stavrov almost immediately, and one month later they also
arrested Univer, the Chairman of the District Executive Com—
mittee and an Estonian. And Romanov took over Univer‘s job as
Chairman of the District Executive Committee. Stavrov was
taken to the Provincial NKVD, where he confessed he was a
Trotskyite, that he had acted in coalition with the SR‘s all his life,
that he was a member of an underground rightist organization in
his district (this is a bouquet worthy of the times, the only thing
missing being a connection with the Entente). Perhaps he never
really did confess these things, but no one is ever going to know,
since he died from torture during interrogation in the internal
prison of the Ivanovo NKVD. The pages of his deposition were
there in full. Soon afterward, they arrested Smirnov, the secretary
of the District Party Committee, as the head of the supposed
rightist organization; and Saburov, the head of the District Fi—
nancial Department, and someone else as well.

Of interest is the way in which Vlasov‘s fate was decided. He
had only recently demanded the expulsion from the Party of
Romanov, now the new Chairman of the District Executive Com—
mittee. He had also fatally offended Rusov, the district prosecutor,
as we have already reported in Chapter 4, above. He had offended
N. I. Krylov, the Chairman of the District NKVD, by protecting
two of his energetic and resourceful executives from being ar—
rested for supposed wrecking—both of them had black marks on
their records because of their social origins. (Vlasov always hired
all kinds of "former" people for his work—because they mastered
