546 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

how was it that the bluecaps allowed the socially hostile elements
to beat up the socially friendly ones? And when they say that at
the Kotlas Transit Prison in 1940 the thieves started to grab
money right out of the hands of the politicals lined up at the
commissary, and the politicals began to beat them up so badly
that they couldn‘t be stopped, and the perimeter guards entered
the compound with machine guns to defend the thieves—now
there‘s something that rings true. That‘s the way it really was.

Foolish relatives! They dash about in freedom, borrow money
(because they never have that kind of money at home), and send
you foodstuffs and things—the widow‘s last mite, but also a
poisoned gift, because it transforms you from a free though
hungry person into one who is anxious and cowardly, and it
deprives you of that newly dawning enlightenment, that toughen—
ing resolve, which are all you need for your descent into the abyss.
Oh, wise Gospel saying about the camel and the eye of the
needle! These material things will keep you from entering the
heavenly kingdom of the liberated spirit. And you see that others
in the police van have the same kind of bags as you. "Ragbag
bastards!" the thieves have already snarled at you in the Black
Maria—but there were only two of them and there were fifty of
you and so far they haven‘t touched you. And now they were
holding us for the second day at the Krasnaya Presnya station
with our legs tucked beneath us on the dirty floor because we were
so crowded. However, none of us was observing the life going on
around us, because we were all too concerned with how to turn
in our suitcases for safekeeping. Even though we were supposed
to have the right to turn in our things for safekeeping, nonetheless
the only reason the work—assignment clerks permitted us to do it
was because the prison was a Moscow prison and we ourselves
hadn‘t yet lost our Moscow look.

What a relief—our things had been checked. (And that meant
we would have to give them up not at this transit prison but later
on.) The only things left dangling from our hands were our
bundles with our ill—fated foodstuffs. Too many of us beavers
had been assembled in one place. They began to distribute us
among different cells. I was shoved into a cell with that same
Valentin whom I had been with the day I signed for my OSO
sentence, and who had proposed with touching sentiment that we
