The Slave Caravans | 575

do it: They order us to lie down all huddled together and they
cover us with one big tarpaulin, like the sailors in the motion
picture Potemkin before they‘re to be executed. And say thank
you for the tarpaulin too. In the North, in October, Olenyev and
his comrades had the luck to have to sit in open flatcars all day
long. They had already embarked, but no locomotive had come.
First it rained. Then it froze. And the zeks‘ rags froze on them.)
The tiny train will jerk and toss as it moves, and the sides of
the flatcar will begin to crack and break, and the bouncing will
hurl someone off the car and under the wheels. And here is a
riddle: If one is traveling sixty miles from Dudinka through Arctic
frost in open flatcars on the narrow—gauge track, then where are
the thieves going to be? Answer: In the middle of each flatcar,
so the livestock around them will keep them warm and keep
them from falling under the train themselves. Right answer!
Question: What will the zeks see at the end of this narrow—gauge
track (1939)? Will there be any buildings there? No, not a one.
Any dugouts? Yes, but already occupied, not for them. And does
that mean that the first thing they do will be to dig themselves
dugouts? No, because how can they dig in the Arctic winter?
Instead, they will be sent out to mine metal. And where will they
live? What—live? Oh, yes, live . . . They will live in tents.

But will there always be a narrow—gauge track? No, of course
not. The train arrived: Yertsovo Station, February, 1938. The
railroad cars were opened up at night. Bonfires were lit along—
side the train and disembarkation took place by their light; then
a count—off, forming up, and a count—off again. The temperature
was 32 degrees below zero Centigrade. The prisoners‘ transport
train had come from the Donbas, and all the prisoners had been
arrested back in the summer and were wearing low shoes, ox—
fords, even sandals. They tried to warm themselves at the fires, but
the guards chased them away: that‘s not what the fires were there
for; they were there to give light. Fingers grew numb almost
instantly. The snow filled the thin shoes and didn‘t even melt.
There was no mercy and the order was given: "Fall in! Form
up! One step to the right or left and we‘ll fire without warning.
Forward march!" The dogs on their chains howled at their favor—
ite command, at the excitement of the moment. The convoy
guards marched ahead in their sheepskin coats—and the doomed
