396 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

And they had hoped to beat what they wanted out of Khrenni—
kov, and Khrennikov didn‘t yield to them either; therefore he
appeared just once in the record—in a footnote in small type:
"Khrennikov died during the course of his interrogation." The
small type you are using is for fools, but we at least know,
and we will write it in double—sized letters; TORTURED TO
DEATH DURING INTERROGATION. He, too, was posthum—
ously named a leader of the Promparty, but there wasn‘t one
least little fact from him, not one tiny piece of testimony in the
general chorus, not one. Because he did not give even one! (And
then all at once Ramzin appeared! He was a find. What energy
and what a grasp! And he was ready to do anything in order to
live! And what talent! He had been arrested only at the end of
the summer, just before the trial really—and he not only man—
aged to enter fully into his role, but it seemed as though he had
written the whole play. He had absorbed a whole mountain of
interrelated material, and he could serve it up spick—and—span,
any name at all, any fact at all. And sometimes he manifested
the languid ornateness of a bigwig scientist: "The activity of the
Promparty was so widespread that even in the course of an
eleven—day trial there is no opportunity to disclose it in total
detail.") (In other words, go on and look for it, look further!)
"I am firmly convinced that a small anti—Soviet stratum still
exists in engineering circles." (Go get ‘em, go get ‘em, grab some
more!) And how capable he was: he knew that it was a riddle,
and that a riddle must be given an artistic explanation. And,
unfeeling as a stick of wood, he found then and there within
himself "the traits of the Russian criminal, for whom purification
lay in public recantation before all the people.""*

So what it comes down to is that all Krylenko and the GPU
had to do was select the right people. But the risk was small.
Goods spoiled in interrogation could always be sent off to the
grave. And whoever managed to get through both the frying pan
and the fire could always be given medical treatment and be
fattened up, and put on public trial!

26. Ramzin has been undeservedly neglected in Russian memories. In my
view, he fully deserved to become the prototype of a cynical and dazzling
traitor. The Bengal fire of betrayal! He wasn‘t the only such villain of this
epoch, but he was certainly a prominent case.
