The Slave Caravans | 577

to arrive nowhere, and the end of the journey often marked the
opening day of a new camp. They might simply stop somewhere
in the taiga under the northern lights and nail to a fir tree a sign
reading: "FIRST OLP."" And there they would chew on dried fish
for a week and try to mix their flour with snow.

But if a camp had been set up there even two weeks earlier,
that already spelled comfort; hot food would have been cooked;
and even if there were no bowls, the first and second courses
would nonetheless be mixed together in washbasins for six prison—
ers to eat from at the same time; and this group of six would form
a circle (there were no tables or chairs yet), and two of them
would hold onto the handles of the washbasin with their left
hands and would eat with their right hands, taking turns. Am I
repeating myself? No, this was Perebory in 1937, as reported by
Loshchilin. It is not I who am repeating myself, but Gulag.

Next they would assign the newcomers brigade leaders from
among the camp veterans, who would quickly feach them to live,
to make do, to submit to discipline, and to cheat. And from their
very first morning, they would march off to work because the
chimes of the clock of the great Epoch were striking and could
not wait. The Soviet Union is not, after all, some Tsarist hard—
labor Akatui for you, where prisoners got three days‘ rest after
they arrived.*

Gradually the economy of the Archipelago prospered. New rail—
road branch lines were built. And soon they were transporting
prisoners by train to many places that had been reached only by
water not long before. But there are natives of the Archipelago
still alive who can tell you how they went down the Izhma River
in genuine ancient Russian river galleys, one hundred to a boat,
and the prisoners themselves did the rowing. They can tell you
how they traveled in fishing smacks down the northern rivers
of Ukhta, Usa, and Pechora to their native camp. Zeks were
shipped to Vorkuta in barges: on large barges to Adzvavom,

2. OLP = Ofdelny Lagerny Punkt = Separate Camp Site.
3. P. F. Yakubovich, V Mire Otverzhennykh.
