404 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

subjected was two weeks of sleeplessness,. (Yakubovich says:
"Just to be allowed to sleep! Neither conscience nor honor matters
any longer.") And then they were confronted with others who
had already given in and who urged them to "confess" . . . to
utter nonsense. And the interrogator himself, Aleksei Alekseye—
vich Nasedkin, said: "I know, I know, none of this actually
happened! But they insist on it!"

On one occasion when Yakubovich had been summoned to
interrogation, he found there a prisoner who had been tortured.
The interrogator smiled ironically: "Moisei Isayevich Teitel—
baum begs you to take him into your anti—Soviet organization.
You can speak as freely as you please. I am going out for a
while." He went out. Teitelbaum really did beg: "Comrade
Yakubovich! I beg you, please take me into your Union Bureau
of Mensheviks! They are accusing me of taking ‘bribes from
foreign firms‘ and threatening me with execution. But I would
rather die a counterrevolutionary than a common criminal!" (It
was likelier that they had promised him that as a counter—
revolutionary he wouldn‘t be shot! And he wasn‘t wrong either:
they gave him a juvenile prison term, a "fiver.") The GPU was
so short on Mensheviks they had to recruit defendants from
volunteers! (And, after all, Teitelbaum was being groomed for
an important role—communication with the Mensheviks abroad
and with the Second International! But they honorably kept the
deal they had made with him—a ‘"fiver.") And with the inter—
rogator‘s approval Yakubovich accepted Teitelbaum as a mem—
ber of the Union Bureau.

Several days before the trial began, the first organizing session
of the Union Bureau of the Mensheviks convened in the office
of the senior interrogator, Dmitri Matveyevich Dmitriyev—so as
to coordinate things, and so that each should understand his own
role better. (That‘s how the Central Committee of the Prom—
party convened too! That‘s where the defendants "could have
met"—to answer Krylenko‘s earlier leading question.) But such
a mountain of falsehood had been piled up that it was too much
to absorb in one session and the participants got things mixed
up, couldn‘t master it in one rehearsal, and were called together
a second time.

What did Yakubovich feel as he went into the trial? Should
