516 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

blatnye, these same thieves? That‘s just what they were. Fascinat—
ing in romantic literary portraits, why are they so repulsive to
you here?

Understand them too! To them prison is their native home. No
matter how fondly the government treats them, no matter how it
softens their punishments, no matter how often it amnesties them,
their inner destiny brings them back again and again. Was not
the first word in the legislation of the Archipelago for them? In
our country, the right to own private property was at one time
just as effectively banished out in freedom too. (And then those
who had banished it began to enjoy possessing things.) So why
should it be tolerated in prison? You were too slow about it; you
didn‘t eat up your fat bacon; you didn‘t share your sugar and
tobacco with your friends. And so now the thieves empty your
bindle in order to correct your moral error. Having given you
their pitiful worn—out boots in exchange for your fashionable
ones, their soiled coveralls in return for your sweater, they won‘t
keep these things for long: your boots were merely something to
lose and win back five times at cards, and they‘ll hawk your
sweater the very next day for a liter of vodka and a round of
salami. They, too, will have nothing left of them in one day‘s time
—just like you. This is the principle of the second law of thermo—
dynamics: all differences tend to level out, to disappear. .

Own nothing! Possess nothing! Buddha and Christ taught us
this, and the Stoics and the Cynics. Greedy though we are, why
can‘t we seem to grasp that simple teaching? Can‘t we under—
stand that with property we destroy our soul?

So let the herring keep warm in your pocket until you get to
the transit prison rather than beg for something to drink here.
And did they give us a two—day supply of bread and sugar? In
that case, eat it in one sitting. Then no one will steal it from you,
and you won‘t have to worry about it. And you‘ll be free as a
bird in heaven!

Own only what you can always carry with you: know lan—
guages, know countries, know people. Let your memory be your
travel bag. Use your memory! Use your memory! It is those
bitter seeds alone which might sprout and grow someday.

Look around you—there are people around you. Maybe you
will remember one of them all your life and later eat your heart
