The Law Matures | 427

whore, you‘ll pay with your blood!""" From that moment Vlasov
was pushed forward from a back seat among the defendants to
a leading role in the trial—as the ideological leader of the group.

The crowd jamming the aisles grew interested whenever the
court fearlessly broke into questions about bread lines—about
things that touched everyone present to the quick. (And, of
course, bread had been put on unrestricted sale just before
the trial, and there were no bread lines that day.) A question to the
accused Smirnov: "Did you know about the bread lines in the
district?" "Yes, of course. They stretched from the store itself
right up to the building of the District Party Committee." "And
what did you do about them?" Notwithstanding the tortures he
had endured, Smirnov had preserved his resounding voice and
tranquil righteousness. This broad—shouldered man with a simple
face and light—brown hair answered slowly, and the whole hall
heard every word he said: "Since all appeals to organizations in
the provincial capital had failed, I instructed Vlasov to write a
report to Comrade Stalin." "And why didn‘t you write it?" (They
hadn‘t yet known about it! They had certainly missed that one!)
"We did write it, and I sent it by courier directly to the Central
Committee, bypassing the provincial leaders. A copy was kept in
the District Committee files."

The whole courtroom held its breath. The court itself was in a
commotion. They shouldn‘t have continued questioning, but
nonetheless someone asked: "And what happened?"

And, indeed, that question was on the lips of everyone in the
courtroom: "What happened?"

Smirnov did not sob, did not groan over the death of his ideal
(and that‘s what was missing in the Moscow trials!). He replied
loudly and calmly:

"Nothing. There was no answer."

And his tired voice seemed to say: Well, that, in fact, was just
what I expected.

There was no answer. From the Father and Teacher there was
no answer! The public trial had already reached its zenith! It had
already shown the masses the black heart of the Cannibal! And

39. Your own blood, too, is going to flow soon, Klyugin! Caught in the
Yezhov gang of gaybisty, Klyugin will have his throat cut by the stool pigeon
Gubaidulin.
