332 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

finger [and it looks very much as though that‘s the way it was]
at such a moment, nevertheless . . . even a conversation over a
teacup as to the kind of system that should replace the Soviet
system, which is allegedly about to fall, is a counterrevolutionary
act. . . . During the Civil War not only is any kind of action
[against Soviet power] a crime . . . but the fact of inaction is also
criminal.""

Well, now everything is comprehensible, everything is clear.
They are being sentenced to death—for inaction. For a cup of
tea.

The Petrograd intellectuals, for example, decided that in the
event of Yudenich‘s taking the city, they would first of all "con—
cern themselves with convening a democratic municipal Duma."
(In other words, to safeguard the city against a possible dictator—
ship.)

EKrylenko: "I would like to shout at them: ‘It was your duty
to think first of all how you might die in battle, so as not to allow
Yudenich into the city" "

But they didn‘t die in battle.

(Nor, in fact, did Nikolai Vasilyevich Krylenko.)

In addition, there were certain defendants who knew about
all this talk and yet kept silent, did not write denunciations. (In
our contemporary lingo: "He knew, but he didn‘t tell.")

And here is another real example not merely of inaction but
of actively criminal action. Through L. N. Khrushcheva, a
member of the Political Red Cross (and there she was, on the
defendants bench), some of the other defendants had raised
money to help the Butyrki prisoners. (One can just picture that
flood of capital—pouring into the prison commissary!) And they
had supplied various articles too. (Yes, indeed. Just look.
Woolens, too, perhaps?)

There were no bounds to their ev11-domg' Nor would there be
any limits to their proletarian punishment!

As when a cinema projector starts slowing down, twenty—eight
prerevolutionary male and female faces flicker past us in a film
that‘s fuzzy and askew. We didn‘t notice their expressions! Were
they frightened? Contemptuous? Proud?

We don‘t have their answers! Their last words are missing—

64. Ibid.
