56 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

have refused to follow the Bolsheviks and without which the
October Revolution would have failed. The land was allocated in
accordance with the number of "mouths" per family, equally. It
had been only nine years since the men of the peasantry had
returned from the Red Army and rushed onto the land they had
wrested for themselves. Then suddenly there were kulaks and
there were poor peasants. How could that be? Sometimes it was
the result of differences in initial stock and equipment; sometimes
it may have resulted from luck in the mixture of the family. But
wasn‘t it most often a matter of hard work and persistence? And
now these peasants, whose breadgrain had fed Russia in 1928,
were hastily uprooted by local good—for—nothings and city people
sent in from outside. Like raging beasts, abandoning every con—
cept of "humanity," abandoning all humane principles which had
evolved through the millennia, they began to round up the very
best farmers and their families, and to drive them, stripped of their
possessions, naked, into the northern wastes, into the tundra and
the taiga.

Such a mass movement could not help but develop subsequent
ramifications. It became necessary to rid the villages also of those
peasants who had merely manifested an aversion to joining the
collective farms, or an absence of inclination for the collective
life, which they had never seen with their own eyes, about which
they knew nothing, and which they suspected (we now know how
well founded their suspicions were) would mean a life of forced
labor and famine under the leadership of loafers. Then it was also
necessary to get rid of those peasants, some of them not at all
prosperous, who, because of their daring, their physical strength,
their determination, their outspokenness at meetings, and their
love of justice, were favorites with their fellow villagers and by
virtue of their independence were therefore dangerous to the
leadership of the collective farm.*" Beyond this, in every village
there were people who in one way or another had personally got—
ten in the way of the local activists. This was the perfect time to
settle accounts with them of jealousy, envy, insult. A new word
was needed for all these new victims as a class—and it was born.
By this time it had no "social" or "economic" content whatsoever,
but it had a marvelous sound: podkulachnik—"a person aiding

25. This kind of peasant and his fate were portrayed immortally in the
character of Stepan Chausov in S. Zalygin‘s novel.
