The Law as a Child | 307

miral Shchastny—"were conducted entirely without stenographic
records."""

This is strange. The condemnation of the Left SR‘s was not a

—trivial matter. It was, after the February and October revolutions,
the third turning point in our history, signaling the transition to
a one—party system in the state. Not a few of them were shot. And
no stenographic record was made.

And the "Military Plot" of 1919 was "liquidated by the Cheka
in an extrajudicial reprisal,""" which "was further proof of its
existence.""" (In this case more than one thousand people were
arrested altogether,"® and, really, how could trials have been set up
for them all?)

So just try to produce a neat, orderly report on the trials of
those years!

Nevertheless we can learn the important principles involved
in them. For example, the supreme accuser—in other words, the
Prosecutor General—informs us that the All—Russian Central Ex—
ecutive Committee had the right to intervene in any judicial pro—
ceeding. "VTsIK pardons and punishes, at its own discretion
without any limitation whatever."" For example, a six—month
sentence was changed to ten years. (And, as the reader under—
stands, it was not necessary for the entire All—Russian Central
Executive Committee to assemble at a plenary meeting to this
end, since its Chairman, Sverdlov, for example, could correct a
sentence without leaving his office.) All of this, Krylenko ex—
plains, "shows the superiority of our system over the false theory
of the separation of powers,""° that is, the theory of the independ—
ence of the judiciary. (True, Sverdlov also said: "It is very good
that the legislative and executive power are not divided by a thick
wall as they are in the West. All problems can be decided
quickly." Especially on the phone.)

Krylenko formulated even more frankly and precisely the
general tasks of the Soviet courts in his speeches before those
tribunals, when the court was "at one and the same time both

15. Ibid., pp. 4—5.

16. Ibid., p. 7.

17. Ibid., p. 44.

18. Latsis, op. cit., p. 46.

19. Krylenko, op. cit., p. 13. (My italics.)
20. Ibid., p. 14.
