448 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

 

Finally, we learn from a story of Ch v that a death cell
can be used as an element in interrogation, as a method of
coercing a prisoner. Two prisoners in Krasnoyarsk who had
refused to confess were suddenly summoned to a "trial," "sen—
tenced" to the death penalty, and taken to the death cell.
(Ch v said: "They were subjected to a staged trial." But in
a context in which every trial is staged, what word can we use to
distinguish this sort of pseudo trial from the rest? A stage on
a stage, or a play within a play, perhaps?) They let them get a
good swallow of that deathlike life. And then they put in stoolies
who were allegedly sentenced to die also and who suddenly be—
gan to repent having been so stubborn during interrogation and
begged the jailer to tell the interrogator that they were now ready
to sign everything. They were given their confessions to sign and
then taken out of the cell during the day—in other words, not to
be shot.

And what about the genuine prisoners in that cell who had
served as the raw material for the interrogators‘ game? They no
doubt experienced reactions of their own when people in there
"repented" and were pardoned? Well, of course, but those are
the producer‘s costs, so to speak.

They say that Konstantin Rokossovsky, the future marshal,
was twice taken into the forest at night for a supposed execution.
The firing squad leveled its rifles at him, and then they dropped
them, and he was taken back to prison. And this was also mak—
ing use of "the supreme measure" as an interrogator‘s trick. But
it was all right; nothing happened; and he is alive and healthy
and doesn‘t even cherish a grudge about it.

 

And almost always a person obediently allows himself to be
killed. Why is it that the death penalty has such a hypnotic
effect? Those pardoned recall hardly anyone in their cell who
offered any resistance. But there were such cases. In the Lenin—
grad Kresty Prison in 1932, the prisoners sentenced to execution
took the jailers‘ revolvers away and opened fire. Following this,
a different approach was adopted: After peering through the
peephole to locate the person they wanted to take, they swarmed
into the cell—five armed jailers at a time—and rushed to grab
their man. There were eight prisoners under sentence of death
