The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 27

One of the first circulars of the NKVD, in December, 1917,
stated: "In view of sabotage by officials . . . use maximum
initiative in localities, not excluding confiscations, compulsion,
and arrests."*

And even though V. I. Lenin, at the end of 1917, in order to
establish "strictly revolutionary order," demanded "merciless
suppression of attempts at anarchy on the part of drunkards,
hooligans, counterrevolutionaries, and other persons""—in other
words, foresaw that drunkards and hooligans represented the
principal danger to the October Revolution, with counterrevolu—
tionaries somewhere back in third place—he nonetheless put the
problem more broadly. In his essay "How to Organize the Com—
petition" (January 7 and 10, 1918), V. I. Lenin proclaimed the
common, united purpose of "purging the Russian land of all
kinds of harmful insects."* And under the term insects he in—
cluded not only all class enemies but also "workers malingering
at their work"—for example, the typesetters of the Petrograd
Party printing shops. (That is what time does. It is difficult for
us nowadays to understand how workers who had just become
dictators were immediately inclined to malinger at work they
were doing for themselves.) And then again: "In what block
of a big city, in what factory, in what village . . . are there not

. saboteurs who call themselves intellectuals?"* True, the
forms of insect—purging which Lenin conceived of in this essay
were most varied: in some places they would be placed under
arrest, in other places set to cleaning latrines; in some, "after
having served their time in punishment cells, they would be
handed yellow tickets"; in others, parasites would be shot; else—
where you could take your pick of imprisonment "or punishment
at forced labor of the hardest kind."" Even though he perceived
and suggested the basic directions punishment should take, Vla—
dimir Ilyich proposed that "communes and communities" should
compete to find the best methods of purging.

It is not possible for us at this time fully to investigate exactly

1. Vestnik NKVD (NKVD Herald), 1917, No. 1, p. 4. *

2. Lenin, Sobrannye Sochineniya (Collected Works), fifth edition, Vol. 35,
p. 68.

3. Ibid., p. 204.

4, Ibid.

5. Ibid., p. 203.
