First Cell, First Love | 221

while, in accordance with ancient Russian tradition, he kept
drowning his confusion more and more often and more and more
deeply in vodka.

What was their spy school really? It was, of course, not a real
one. All they could be taught in six months was to master the
parachute, the use of explosives, and the use of portable radios.
The Germans put no special trust in them. In sending them
across the lines they were simply whistling in the dark. And for
those dying, hopelessly abandoned Russian POW‘s, those schools,
in Yuri‘s opinion, were a good way out. The men ate their fill,
got new warm clothing, and, in addition, had their pockets
stuffed with Soviet money. The students (and their teachers)
acted as if all this nonsense were genuine—as if they would
actually carry out spying missions in the Soviet rear, blow up the
designated objectives, get back in touch with the Germans via
radio, and return to the German lines. But in reality in their
eyes this school was simply a means of sidestepping death and
captivity. They wanted to live, but not at the price of shooting
their own compatriots at the front." The Germans sent them
across the front lines, and from then on their free choice depended
on their own morality and conscience. They all threw away their
TNT and radio apparatus immediately. The only point on which
they differed was whether to surrender to the authorities immedi—
ately, like the snub—nosed "shhpy" I had encountered at army
counterintelligence headquarters, or whether to get drunk first
and have some fun squandering all that free money. None of them
ever recrossed the front lines to the Germans.

Suddenly, as the new year of 1945 approached, one smart
fellow did return and reported he had carried out his assignment.
(Just go and check on it!) He created a sensation. The Chief
hadn‘t the slightest doubt that SMERSH had sent him back and
decided to shoot him. (The fate of a conscientious spy!) But Yuri
insisted that he be given a decoration instead and held up as an

21. Of course, our Soviet interrogators did not accept this line of reasoning.
What right did they have to want to live—at a time when privileged families
in the Soviet rear lived well without collaborating? No one ever thought of
considering that these boys had refused to take up German arms against their
own people. For playing spies, they were nailed with the very worst and most
serious charges of all—Article 58—6, plus sabotage with intent. This meant: to
be held until dead.
