The Law Matures | 383

manding that they give convincing examples of how they might
have carried on wrecking activities.)

"Give us a clear example! Give us a clear example of your
wrecking activity!‘" the impatient Krylenko urges them on.

(They will give you outstanding examples! Just wait! Soon
someone will write the history of the technology of those years!
He will give you examples—and negative examples. He will
evaluate for you all the convulsions of your epileptic "Five—Year
Plan in Four Years." Then we will find out how much of the
people‘s wealth and strength was squandered. Then we will find
out how all the best projects were destroyed, and how the worst
projects were carried out by the worst means. Well, yes, if the
Mao Tse—tung breed of Red Guard youths supervise brilliant
engineers, what good can come of it? Dilettante enthusiasts—
they were the ones who egged on their even stupider leaders.)

Yes, full details are a disservice. Somehow the more details
provided, the less the evil deeds seem to smell of execution.

But just a moment! We‘ve not had everything yet! The most
important crimes all lie ahead! Here they are, here they come,
comprehensible and intelligible to every illiterate! The Promparty
(1) prepared the way for the Intervention; (2) took money from
the imperialists; (3) conducted espionage; (4) assigned cabinet
posts in a future government.

And that did it! All mouths were shut. And all those who had
been expressing their reservations fell silent. And only the tramp—
ing of demonstrators could be heard, and the roars outside the
window: "Death! Death! Death!"

What about some more details? Why should you want more
details? Well, then, if that‘s the way you want it; but they will
only be more frightening. They were all acting under orders from
the French General Staff. After all, France doesn‘t have enough
worries, or difficulties, or party conflicts of its own, and it is
enough just to whistle, and, lo and behold, divisions will march.
. . . Intervention! First they planned it for 1928. But they couldn‘t
come to an agreement, they couldn‘t tie up all the loose ends.
All right, so they postponed it to 1930. But once more they
couldn‘t agree among themselves. All right, 1931 then. And,
as a matter of fact, here‘s how it was to go: France herself would
not fight but, as her commission for organizing the deal, would
