The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 45

be terribly devoted to the development of the new economy, and
would hold forth for hours on end about the economic problems
involved in the construction of socialism, and he loved to give
advice. One such pernicious piece of advice was to increase the
size of freight trains and not worry about heavier than average
loads. The GPU exposed von Meck, and he was shot: his ob—
jective had been to wear out rails and roadbeds, freight cars and
locomotives, so as to leave the Republic without railroads in case
of foreign military intervention! When, not long afterward, the
new People‘s Commissar of Railroads, Comrade Kaganovich,
ordered that average loads should be increased, and even doubled
and tripled them (and for this discovery received the Order of
Lenin along with others of our leaders)—the malicious engineers
who protested became known as limiters. They raised the
outcry that this was too much, and would result in the breakdown
of the rolling stock, and they were rightly shot for their lack of
faith in the possibilities of socialist transport.

These limiters were pursued for several years. In all branches
of the economy they brandished their formulas and calculations
and refused to understand that bridges and lathes could respond to
the enthusiasm of the personnel. (These were the years when all
the norms of folk psychology were turned inside out: the circum—
spect folk wisdom expressed in such a proverb as "Haste makes
waste" was ridiculed, and the ancient saying that "The slower you
go, the farther you‘ll get" was turned inside out.) The only thing
which at times delayed the arrest of the old engineers was the
absence of a, new batch to take their place. Nikolai Ivanovich
Ladyzhensky, chief engineer of defense plants in Izhevsk, was first
arrested for "limitation theories" and "blind faith in safety factors"
(which explained why he considered inadequate the funds al—
located by Ordzhonikidze for factory expansion)." Then they
put him under house arrest and ordered him back to work in his
old job. Without him the work was collapsing. He put it back in
shape. But the funds allocated were just as inadequate as they had
been earlier, and so once again he was thrown in prison, this time
for "incorrect use of funds": the funds were insufficient, they

21. They say that when Ordzhonikidze used to talk with the old engineers,
he would put one pistol on his desk beside his right hand and another beside
his left.
