The Ports of the Archipelago | 559

unable to predict who would proceed where. At that time the
prison system had not yet crystallized as it had by the fifties, and
there were no routes and no destinations were indicated for any—
body—except perhaps for service instructions: "Keep under
strict guard"; "To be employed only on general—assignment work."
The convoy sergeants carried the bundles of prison cases, torn
folders tied somehow with twine or ersatz cotton string made of
paper, into a separate wooden building that housed the prison
offices, and tossed them onto shelves, on tables, under tables,
under chairs, and simply on the floor in the aisle (just as their
subject prisoners lay in the cells). They became untied and got
scattered and mixed up. One room, a second, and a third got
filled with those mixed—up cases. Secretaries from the prison office,
well—fed, lazy, free women in bright—colored dresses, sweated in
the heat, fanned themselves and flirted with prison and convoy
officers. None of them wanted to or had the strength to pick a way
through that chaos. And yet the trainloads had to be dispatched
in the red trains—several times a week. And every day a hundred
people had to be sent out on trucks to nearby camps. The case
of every zek had to be sent with him. So just who was going to
work on all that long—drawn—out mess? Who was there to sort
out the cases and select the prisoners for the transports?

It was entrusted to several work—assignment supervisors from
among the transit—prison trusties—who were either "bitches" or
"half—breeds."" They moved freely through the prison corridors,
entered the prison office, and were the ones who decided whether
your case would be put in a bad prisoner transport or whether
they would really exert themselves, search long and hard, and put
it in a good one. (The newcomers were not mistaken in thinking
that there were whole camps which were death camps, and they
were right about that, but their idea that there were some that
were "good" was simply a delusion. There were no good camps,
but only certain easier duties within them—and they could only
be sorted out on the spot.) The fact that the prisoner‘s whole
future depended on such another prisoner, with whom one ought
perhaps to find the chance to talk (even if via the bath attendant),

9. "Half—breeds" or "mulattoes" (polutsvetnye in Russian) were prisoners
who had grown spiritually close to the thieves and tried to imitate them, but
who had nonetheless not been accepted by the thieves‘ law.
