That Spring | 251

argument and objections. The deserters had to spend all those
years rotting in prison, and they would not be forgiven. But
there would soon be an amnesty for everyone else; they would
all be released. (At that time the principal advantage of being a
deserter was still unknown.)

Those who had gotten in via 58—10, snatched from their
apartments or from the Red Army, often envied the rest. What
the hell! For the very same money, in other words for the same
ten—year sentence, they could have seen so many interesting
things, like those other fellows, who had been just about every—
where! And here we are, about to croak in camp, without ever
having seen anything beyond our own stinking stairs. Inciden—
tally, those who were in on Article 58—10 could hardly conceal
their triumphant presentiment that they would be the first to be
amnestied.

The only ones who did not sigh: "Oh, if I had only known"——
because they knew very well what they were doing—and the
only ones who did not expect any mercy and did not expect an
amnesty—were the Vlasov men.

I had known about them and been perplexed about them long
before our unexpected meeting on the board bunks of prison.
First there had been the leaflets, repeatedly soaked through,
dried out, and lost in the high grass—uncut for the third year—
of the front—line strip near Orel. In December, 1942, they had
announced the creation in Smolensk of a "Russian Committee"
—which apparently claimed to be some sort of Russian govern—
ment and yet at the same time seemed not to be one. Evidently
the Germans themselves had not yet made up their minds. For
that reason, the communiqué seemed to be a hoax. There was a
photograph of General Vlasov in the leaflets, and his biography
was outlined. In the fuzzy photograph, his face looked well fed
and successful, like all our generals of the new stripe. They told
me later that this wasn‘t so, that Vlasov‘s face was more like that
of a Western general—high, thin, with horn—rimmed glasses. His
biography testified to a penchant for success. He had begun in
a peasant family, and 1937 had not broken his skyrocketing
career; nor was it ruined by his service as a military adviser to
