132 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

fully, frankly, and hid nothing." Even Pestel broke down and
named comrades (who were still free) assigned to bury Russkaya
Pravda and the very place where it had been buried."" There were
very few who, like Lunin, expressed disdain and contempt for
the investigating commission. The majority behaved badly and
got one another more deeply involved. Many of them begged
abjectly to be pardoned! Zavalishin put all the blame on Ryleyev.
Y. P. Obolensky and S. P. Trubetskoi couldn‘t wait to slander
Griboyedov—which even Nicholas I didn‘t believe.

Bakunin in his Confessions abjectly groveled before Nicholas
I—thereby avoiding execution. Was this wretchedness of soul?
Or revolutionary cunning?

One would think that those who decided to assassinate Alex—
ander II must have been people of the highest selflessness and
dedication. After all, they knew what the stakes were! Grinye—
vitsky shared the fate of the Tsar, but Rysakov remained alive and
was held for interrogation. And that very day he blabbed on the
participants in the plot and identified their secret meeting places.
Out of fear for his young life he rushed to give the government
more information than he could ever have been suspected of
having. He nearly choked with repentance; he proposed to "ex—
pose all the secrets of the Anarchists."

At the end of the last century and the beginning of this one,
the Tsarist interrogator immediately withdrew his question if
the prisoner found it inappropriate or too intimate. But in Kresty
Prison in 1938, when the old political hard—labor prisoner Zelen—
sky was whipped with ramrods with his pants pulled down like
a small boy, he wept in his cell: "My Tsarist interrogator didn‘t
even dare address me rudely."

Or, for example, we learn from recently published research**
that the Tsarist gendarmes seized the manuscript of Lenin‘s es—
say "What Are Our Ministers Thinking Of?" but were unable to
get at its author:

"At the interrogation the gendarmes, just as one might have
expected, learned very little from the student Vaneyev. [The

27. In part, the reason for this was the same as in the case of Bukharin many
years later. They were, after all, being interrogated by their social equals, their

class brothers, and so their desire to explain everything was only natural.
28. R. Peresvetov, Novy Mir, No. 4, 1962.
