498 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

that would really be acting like a sucker.) The toilet was filthy.
Quicker, quicker! And tracking back the liquid mess on his shoes,
the prisoner would be shoved back into the compartment, where
he would climb up over somebody‘s arms and shoulders, and then,
from the top row, his dirty shoes would dangle to the middle row
and drip.

When women were taken to the toilet, the statutes of the con—
voy service, and common sense as well, required that the toilet
door be kept open, but not every convoy insisted on this and some
allowed the door to be shut: Oh, all right, go ahead and shut it.
(Later on one of the women was sent in to wash out the toilet,
and the guard again had to stand right there beside her so that
she didn‘t try to escape.)

And even at this fast tempo, visits to the toilet for 120 people
would take more than two hours—more than a quarter of the
entire shift for three convoy guards! And in spite of that, you still
couldn‘t make them happy. In spite of that, some old sandpiper
or other would begin to cry half an hour later and ask to go to
the toilet, and, of course, he wouldn‘t be allowed to go, and then
he would soil himself right there in the compartment, and once
again that meant trouble for the private first class: the prisoner
had to be forced to pick it up in his hands and carry it away.

So that was all there was to it: fewer trips to the toilet! And
that meant less water, and less food too—because then they
wouldn‘t complain of loose bowels and stink up the air; after all,
how bad could it be? A man couldn‘t even breathe.

Less water! But they had to hand out the herring anyway, just
as the regulations required! No water—that was a reasonable
measure. No herring—that was a service crime.

No one, no one at all, ever set out to torture us on purpose!
The convoy‘s actions were quite reasonable! But, like the ancient
Christians, we sat there in the cage while they poured salt on our
raw and bleeding tongues.

Also the prisoner—transport convoys did not often deliberately
(though sometimes they did) mix the thieves—blatari—and non—
political offenders in with Article 58 politicals in the same com—
partment. But a particular situation existed: There were a great
many prisoners and very few railroad cars and compartments, and
