The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 89

even greater advantage in prison terms. If a young girl sent into
the fields to get a few ears of grain took along two friends for com—
pany ("an organized gang") or some twelve—year—old youngsters
went after cucumbers or apples, they were liable to get twenty
years in camp. In factories, the maximum sentence was raised to
twenty—five years. (This sentence, called the quarter, had been
introduced a few days earlier to replace the death penalty, which
had been abolished as a humane act.)*"

And then, at long last, an ancient shortcoming of the law was
corrected. Previously the only failure to make a denunciation
which qualified as a crime against the state had been in connection
with political offenses. But now simple failure to report the theft
of state or collective farm property earned three years of camp or
seven years of exile.

In the years immediately following this decree, whole "divi—
sions" from the countryside and the cities were sent off to cultivate
the islands of Gulag in place of the natives who had died off there.
True, these waves were processed through the police and the
ordinary courts, and did not clog the channels of State Security,
which, even without them, were overstrained in the postwar years.

Stalin‘s new line, suggesting that it was necessary, in the wake
of the victory over fascism, to fail more people more energetically
and for longer terms than ever before, had immediate repercus—
sions, of course, on political prisoners.

The year 1948—1949, notable throughout Soviet public life for
intensified persecution and vigilance, was marked by one tragi—
comedy hitherto unheard of even in Stalinist antijustice—that of
the repeaters.

That is what, in the language of Gulag, they called those still
undestroyed unfortunates of 1937 vintage, who had succeeded in
surviving ten impossible, unendurable years, and who in 1947—
1948, had timidly stepped forth onto the land of freedom . . .
worn out, broken in health, but hoping to live out in peace what
little of their lives remained. But some sort of savage fantasy (or
stubborn malice, or unsated vengeance) pushed the Victorious

47. And the death penalty itself was kept veiled for a brief period only;
the veil was removed, amid a show of bared fangs, two and a half years later
—in January, 1950.
