The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 63

To whom, one wonders, could this possibly refer? And yet,
broadly interpreted, and with the help of a revolutionary con—
science, it was easy to find categories: All émigrés who had left
the country before 1920, i.e., several years before the Code
was even written, and whom our armies came upon in Europe
a quarter—century later—in 1944 and 1945—received 58—4:
ten years or execution. What could they have been doing
abroad other than aiding the international bourgeoisie? (In
the example of the young people‘s musical society already
cited, we have seen that the international bourgeoisie could
also be aided from inside the U.S.S.R.) They were, in addition,
aided by all SR‘s, all Mensheviks (the section was drafted
with them in mind), and, subsequently, by the engineers of the
State Planning Commission and the Supreme Council of the
Economy.

Section 5 was inciting a foreign state to declare war against
the U.S.S.R.

A chance was missed to apply this section against Stalin
and his diplomatic and military circle in 1940—1941. Their
blindness and insanity led to just that. Who if not they drove
Russia into shameful, unheard—of defeats, incomparably worse
than the defeats of Tsarist Russia in 1904 or 1915? Defeats
such as Russia had never known since the thirteenth century.

Section 6 was espionage.

This section was interpreted so broadly that if one were to
count up all those sentenced under it one might conclude that
during Stalin‘s time our people supported life not by agriculture
or industry, but only by espionage on behalf of foreigners,
and by living on subsidies from foreign intelligence services.
Espionage was very convenient in its simplicity, compre—
hensible both to an undeveloped criminal and to a learned
jurist, to a journalist and to public opinion."*

The breadth of interpretation of Section 6 lay further in

29. And very likely spy mania was not merely the narrow—minded predilec—
tion of Stalin alone. It was very useful for everyone who possessed any priv—
ileges. It became the natural justification for increasingly widespread secrecy,
the withholding of information, closed doors and security passes, fenced—off
dachas and secret, restricted special shops. People had no way of penetrating
the armor plate of spy mania and learning how the bureaucracy made its cozy
arrangements, loafed, blundered, ate, and took its amusements.
