32 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

misfortune, just think about it! What injustice!""" And he ad—
vised Gorky "not to waste [his] energy whimpering over rotten
intellectuals."**

From January, 1919, on, food requisitioning was organized
and food—collecting detachments were set up. They encountered
resistance everywhere in the rural areas, sometimes stubborn
and passive, sometimes violent. The suppression of this opposi—
tion gave rise to an abundant flood of arrests during the course
of the next two years, not counting those who were shot on the
spot.

I am deliberately bypassing here the major part of the grinding
done by the Cheka, the Special Branches, and the Revolutionary
Tribunals as the front line advanced and cities and provinces
were occupied. And that same NKVD directive of August 30,
1918, ordered that efforts be made to ensure "the unconditional
execution of all who had been involved in White Guard work."
But sometimes it is not clear where to draw the line. By the
summer of 1920, for example, the Civil War had not entirely
ended everywhere. But it was over on the Don; nonetheless offi—
cers were sent from there en masse—from Rostov, and from
Novocherkassk—to Archangel, whence they were transported to
the Solovetsky Islands, and, it is said, several of the barges were
sunk in the White Sea and in the Caspian Sea. Now should this
be billed to the Civil War or to the beginning of peacetime re—
construction? In Novocherkassk, in the same year, they shot the
pregnant . wife of an officer because she had hidden her husband.
In what classification should she be put?

In May, 1920, came the well—known decree of the Central
Committee "on Subversive Activity in the Rear." We know
from experience that every such decree is a call for a new wave
of widespread arrests; it is the outward sign of such a wave. _

A particular difficulty—and also a particular: advantage—in
the organization of all these waves was the absence of a criminal
code or any system of criminal law whatsoever before 1922.
Only a revolutionary sense of justice (always infallible) guided
those doing the purging and managing the sewage system when
they were deciding whom to take and what to do with them.

In this survey we are not going to investigate the successive

12. Ibid., p. 47.
13. Ibid., p. 49.
