502 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

spread into the "V" of a slingshot, right in your eyes—not even
pausing to threaten you but starting to punch them out then and
there. And this gesture of theirs, which says, "T‘ll gouge out your
eyes, crowbait!" covers their entire philosophy and faith! If they
are capable of crushing your eyeballs like worms, what is there
on you or belonging to you that they‘ll spare? The little cross
dangles there and your still unsquashed eyes watch this wildest
of masquerades, and your whole system of reckoning goes awry:
Which of you is already crazy? And who is about to go insane?

In one moment, all the customs and habits of human inter—
course you have lived with all your life have broken down. In
your entire previous life, particularly before your arrest but even
to some degree afterward, even to some degree during interroga—
tion, too, you spoke words to other people and they answered you
in words. And those words produced actions. One might per—
suade, or refuse, or come to an agreement. You recall various
human relationships—a request, an order, an expression of grati—
tude. But what has overtaken you here is beyond all these words
and beyond all these relationships. An emissary of the ugly snout
descends, most often a vicious boy whose impudence and rude—
ness are thrice despicable, and this little demon unties your bag
and rifles your pockets—not tentatively, but treating them like
his very own. From that moment, nothing that belongs to you is
yours any longer. And all you yourself are is a rubber dummy
around which superfluous things are wrapped which can easily
be taken off. Nor can you explain anything in words, nor deny,
nor prohibit, nor plead with that evil little skunk or those foul
snouts up above. They are not people. This has become clear to
you in one moment. The only thing to be done with them is to
beat them, to beat them without wasting any time flapping your
tongue. Either that juvenile there or those bigger vermin up above.

But how can you hit those three up top from down below? And
the kid there, even though he‘s a stinking polecat, well, it doesn‘t
seem right to hit him either. Maybe you can push him away soft
like? No, you can‘t even do that, because he‘ll bite your nose right
off, or else they‘ll break your head from above (and they have
knives, too, but they aren‘t going to bother to pull them out and
soil them on you).

You look at your neighbors, your comrades: Let‘s either resist
