262 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

several hundred thousand young men,"* aged twenty to thirty,
took up arms against their Fatherland as allies of its most evil
enemy. Perhaps there is something to ponder here: Who was
more to blame, those youths or the gray Fatherland? One cannot
explain this treason biologically. It has to have had a social
cause.

Because, as the old proverb says: Well—fed horses don‘t ram—
page.

Then picture to yourself a field in which starved, neglected,
crazed horses are rampaging back and forth.

That same spring many Russian émigrés were also in those cells.

It was very like a dream: the resurrection of buried history.
The weighty tomes on the Civil War had long since been com—
pleted and their covers shut tight. The causes for which people
fought in it had been decided. The chronology of its events had
been set down in textbooks. The leaders of the White movement
were, it appeared, no longer our contemporaries on earth but
mere ghosts of a past that had melted away. The Russian émigrés
had been more cruelly dispersed than the tribes of Israel. And,
in our Soviet imagination, if they were still dragging out their
lives somewhere, it was as pianists in stinking little restaurants,
as lackeys, laundresses, beggars, morphine and cocaine addicts,
and virtual corpses. Right up to 1941, when the war came, it
would have been impossible to find out from any hints in our
newspapers, our lofty literature, our criticism of the arts (nor
did our own well—fed masters of art and literature help us find
out) that Russia Abroad was a great spiritual world, that in it
Russian philosophy was living and developing; that out there
were philosophers like Bulgakov, Berdyayev, and Lossky; that
Russian art had enchanted the world; that Rachmaninoff, Chal—
iapin, Benois, Diaghilev, Pavlova, and the Don Cossack Chorus
of Jaroff were out there; that profound studies of Dostoyevsky
were being undertaken (at a time when he was anathema in the

13. This, in fact, is the number of Soviet citizens who were in the Wehr—
macht—in pre—Vlasov and Vlasov formations, and in the Cossack, Moslem,
Baltic, and Ukrainian units and detachments.
