458 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

two large prison courtyards in flowers and vegetables—no fewer
than 450 varieties! And then there were scientific collections, a
carpentry shop, a smithy, and they could earn money and buy
books, even Russian political books," and also magazines from
abroad. And they wrote their families and got letters from them.
And they could go out to walk the whole day long if they liked.

And gradually, as Figner recollects, "it was no longer the
superintendent who shouted at the prisoners, but we who shouted
at him." In 1902, because he refused to forward a protest of hers,
she ripped the shoulder boards off his uniform. And the result
was that a military investigator came and apologized profusely to
Figner for the ignoramus superintendent!

How did that horn come to shrink and broaden? Figner ex—
plains it to some extent by the humanitarian attitudes of indi—
vidual prison superintendents, and also by the fact that the "gen—
darmes became friendly with the prisoners," got used to them. One
significant factor certainly was the prisoners‘ determination and
dignity and adroitness in conducting themselves. But nonetheless
I myself believe that it was the temper of the times: this moisture
and freshness in the air which drove away the thundercloud; this
breeze of freedom, which was sweeping through society, it was
decisive. Without it one could have given the gendarmes instruc—
tions from the Short Course every Monday, and kept tightening
things up, kept putting the screws on. And instead of "impressed
labor," Vera Nikolayevna Figner, for tearing off an officetr‘s
shoulder boards, would have gotten nine grams in the back of her
head in a cellar.

The weakening and shaking up of the Tsarist prison system
did not come about on its own, of course, but because all society,
in concert with the revolutionaries, was shaking it up and ridi—
culing it in every possible way. Tsarism lost its chance to survive
not in the street skirmishes of February but several decades earlier,
when youths from well—to—do families began to consider a prison
term an honor; when army officers (even guard officers) began
to regard it as dishonorable to shake the hand of a gendarme.
And the more the prison system weakened, the more clearly

5. P. A. Krasikov, who, as we have seen, later condemned the Metropolitan
Veniamin to death, read Marx‘s Capital in the Peter and Paul Fortress. (But
he was there only a year, and then they let him out.)
