614 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

The boys read me their own verses and demanded mine in
exchange, and I as yet had none. They read Pasternak particu—
larly, whom they praised to the skies. I had once read "My Sister
Life" and hadn‘t liked it, considering it precious, abstruse, and
very, very far from ordinary human paths. But they recited to me
Licutenant Shmidt‘s last speech at his trial, and it touched me
deeply because it applied so to us:

For thirty years I have nurtured
My love for my native land,

And I shall neither expect

Nor miss your leniency.

Gammerov and Ingal were just as shiningly attuned as that: We
do not need your leniency! We are not languishing from imprison—
ment; we are proud of it. (But who is really capable of not lan—
guishing? After a few months Ingal‘s young wife renounced and
abandoned him. Gammerov, because of his revolutionary inclina—
tions, did not even have a sweetheart yet.) Was it not here, in
these prison cells, that the great truth dawned? The cell was con—
stricted, but wasn‘t freedom even more constricted? Was it not
our own people, tormented and deceived, that lay beside us there
under the bunks and in the aisles?

Not to arise with my whole land
Would have been harder still,

And for the path that I have trod
I have no qualms at all.

The young people imprisoned in these cells under the political
articles of the Code were never the average young people of the
nation, but were always separated from them by a wide gap. In
those years most of our young people still faced a future of "dis—
integrating," of becoming disillusioned, indifferent, falling in love
with an easy life—and then, perhaps, beginning all over again
the bitter climb from that cozy little valley up to a new peak—
possibly after another twenty years? But the young prisoners of
1945, sentenced under 58—10, had leaped that whole future chasm
of indifference in one jump—and bore their heads boldly erect
under the ax.

In the Butyrki church, the Moscow students, already sentenced,
