From Island to Island | 599

Of course no one had. And thus it was that fate played its joke,
compelling me, in spite of everything, to stray into nuclear physics,
the same field in which I had registered on the Gulag card.

After the rations were issued, the Scientific and Technical So—
ciety of Cell 75, consisting of ten or so people, assembled at the
left window and I made my report and was accepted into the
society. I had forgotten some things, and I could not fully com—
prehend others, and Timofeyev—Ressovsky, even though he had
been in prison for a year and knew nothing of the atom bomb,
was able on occasion to fill in the missing parts of my account.
An empty cigarette pack was my blackboard, and I held an
illegal fragment of pencil lead. Nikolai Vladimirovich took them
away from me and sketched and interrupted, commenting with as
much self—assurance as if he had been a physicist from the Los
Alamos group itself.

He actually had worked with one of the first European cyclo—
trons, but for the purpose of irradiating fruit flies. He was a
biologist, one of the most important geneticists of our time. He
had already been in prison back when Zhebrak, not knowing
that (or, perhaps, knowing it), had the courage to write in a
Canadian magazine: "Russian biology is not responsible for
Lysenko; Russian biology is Timofeyev—Ressovsky." (And during
the destruction of Soviet biology in 1948 Zhebrak paid for this.)
Schrodinger, in his small book What Is Life?, twice cited
Timofeyev—Ressovsky, who had long since been imprisoned.

And there he was in front of us, and he was simply bursting
with information concerning all possible sciences. He had that
breadth of scope which scientists of later generations don‘t even
want to have. (Or is it that the possibilities of encompassing
knowledge have changed?) And even though at the moment he
was so worn down by the starvation of the interrogation period
that these exercises were very difficult for him. On his mother‘s
side he was descended from impoverished Kaluga gentlefolk who
had lived on the Ressa River, and on his father‘s side he was a
collateral descendant of Stepan Razin, and that Cossack energy
was very obvious in him—in his broad frame, in his basic sound—
ness, in his determined struggle with his interrogator, and also in
the fact that he suffered from hunger more than we did.

And his story was this: In 1922 the German scientist Vogt,
