466 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

event or other precipitated a new joint hunger strike by the entire
Verkhne—Uralsk Isolator. But this time the earlier stern and
solemn atmosphere was absent, as were the approval of friends
and a doctor of their own. On a certain day of the strike, the
jailers came bursting into the cells in overwhelming numbers,
and simply began to beat the weakened prisoners with clubs and
boots. They beat them to within an inch of their lives—and the
hunger strike ended.

From our experience of the past and our literature of the past we
have derived a naive faith in the power of a hunger strike. But the
hunger strike is a purely moral weapon. It presupposes that the
jailer has not entirely lost his conscience. Or that the jailer is
afraid of public opinion. Only in such circumstances can it be
effective.

The Tsarist jailers were still inexperienced. They got nervous
if one of their prisoners went on a hunger strike; they exclaimed
over it; they looked after him; they put him in the hospital. There
are many examples, but this work is not about them. It is even
humorous to note that it was enough for Valentinov to go on a
hunger strike for twelve days: as a result, he not only achieved
some relaxation in the regimen but was totally released from in—
terrogation—whereupon he went to Lenin in Switzerland. Even
in the Orel central hard—labor prison the strikers always won.
They got the regimen relaxed in 1912 and further relaxed in
1913, to the point of general access to outdoor walks for all
political hard—labor prisoners—who were obviously so unre—
stricted by their supervisors that they managed to compose and
send out to freedom their appeal "to the Russian people." (And
this from the hard—labor prisoners of a central prison!) Further—
more, it was published. (It‘s enough to make one‘s eyes pop out
of one‘s head! Someone has to have been crazy‘!) It was published
in 1914 in issue No. 1 of the Vestnik Katorgi i Ssylki—the Hard—
Labor and Exile Herald." (And what about that Herald itself?

11. M. N. Gernet, Istoriya Tsarskoi Tyurmy (A History of Czarist Prisons),
Moscow, Yuridicheskaya Literatura (Legal Literature Publishers), 1960—1963,
Vol. V, Ch. 8.
