The Slave Caravans | 583

reader already knows everything that is going to happen ahead of
time: The prisoners would be trucked hundreds of miles, and
driven dozens of miles more on foot. And on arriving they would
occupy new camp sites and immediately be sent out to work. And
they would eat fish and flour, chased down with snow. And sleep
in tents.

Yes, it was like that. But first the authorities would put them
up in Magadan, also in Arctic tents, and would commission them
there too—in other words, examine them naked to determine
their fitness for labor from the condition of their buttocks (and
all of them would turn out to be fit). In addition, of course, they
would be taken to a bath and in the bath vestibule they would be
ordered to leave their leather coats, their Romanov sheepskin
coats, their woolen sweaters, their suits of fine wool, their felt
cloaks, their leather boots, their felt boots (for, after all, these
were no illiterate peasants this time, but the Party elite—editors
of newspapers, directors of trusts and factories, responsible offi—
cials in the provincial Party committees, professors of political
economy, and, by the beginning of the thirties, all of them under—
stood what good merchandise was). "And who is going to guard
them?" the newcomers asked skeptically. "Oh, come on now,
who needs your things?" The bath personnel acted offended.
"Go on in and don‘t worry." And they did go in. And the exit
was through a different door, and after passing through it, they
received black cotton breeches, field shirts, camp quilted jackets
without pockets, and pigskin shoes. (Oh, this was no small thing!
This was farewell to your former life—to your titles, your posi—
tions, and your arrogance!) "Where are our things?" they cried.
"Your things you left at home!" some chief or other bellowed at
them. "In camp nothing belongs to you. Here in camp we have
communism! Forward march, leader!"

And if it was "communism," then what was there for them
to object to? That is what they had dedicated their lives to.

e
And there are also prisoner transports in carts and simply on

foot. Do you remember in Tolstoi‘s Resurrection how on a sunny
day they drove them on foot from the prison to the railroad sta—
