In the Engine Room | 291

consider that capital punishment never did depart from Beria‘s
cellars.) And the decree stated that the death sentence could be
imposed on subversives—diversionists. What did that mean? It
didn‘t say. Tosif Vissarionovich loved it that way: not to say all of
it, just to hint. Did it refer only to someone who blew up rails
with TNT? It didn‘t say. We had long since come to know what
a "diversionist" was: someone who produced goods of poor qual—
ity was a diversionist. But what was a subversive? Was someone
subverting the authority of the government, for example, in a con—
versation on a streetcar? Or if a girl married a foreigner—wasn‘t
she subverting the majesty of our Motherland?

But it is not the judge who judges. The judge only takes his
pay. The directives did the judging. The directive of 1937: ten
years; twenty years; execution by shooting. The directive of 1943:
twenty years at hard labor; hanging. The directive of 1945: ten
years for everyone, plus five of disenfranchisement‘ (manpower
for three Five—Year Plans). The directive of 1949:; everyone gets
twenty—five.?

The machine stamped out the sentences. The prisoner had
already been deprived of all rights when they cut off his buttons
on the threshold of State Security, and he couldn‘t avoid a stretch.
The members of the legal profession were so used to this that
they fell on their faces in 1958 and caused a big scandal. The
text of the projected new "Fundamental Principles of Criminal
Prosecution of the U.S.S.R." was published in the newspapers,
and they‘d forgotten to include any reference to possible grounds
for acquittal. The government newspaper issued a mild rebuke:
"The impression might be created that our courts only bring in
convictions." ' .

But just take the jurists‘ side for a moment: why, in fact, should
a trial be supposed to have two possible outcomes when our
general elections are conducted on the basis of one candidate? An
acquittal is, in fact, unthinkable from the economic point of view!
It would mean that the informers, the Security officers, the inter—

7. Babayev, in fact a nonpolitical, shouted at them: "You can ‘muzzle‘ me
for three hundred years! But I‘ll never lift my hand for you, you benefactors!"

8. Thus it was that a real spy (Schultz, in Berlin, in 1948) could get ten
years, and someone who had never been a spy, Giinther Waschkau, got twenty—
five. Because he was in the wave of 1949.

9. Izvestiya, September 10, 1958.
