From Island to Island | 605

"And you, of course, agreed enthusiastically."

"Most certainly! After all, we have come to understand our
mistakes. And besides, all the equipment wrenched from its
original place and put into packing cases got here even with—
out us."

"What dedication to science on the part of the MVD! May I
ask for a little more Schubert?"

And Tsarapkin sang softly, staring sadly at the window (his
spectacles reflecting both their dark "muzzles" and their light
upper sections) :

Vom Abendrot zum Morgenlicht
ward mancher Kopf zum Greise.

Wer glaubt es? Meiner ward es nicht
auf dieser ganzen Reise.

Tolstoi‘s dream has come true: Prisoners are no longer compelled
to attend pernicious religious services. The prison churches have
been shut down. True, their buildings remain, but they have
been successfully adapted to enlarge the prisons themselves. Two
thousand additional prisoners have thereby been housed in the
Butyrki church—and in the course of a year, estimating an aver—
age turnover of two weeks, another fifty thousand will pass
through the cells in what was once the church.

On arriving at the Butyrki for the fourth or fifth time, hurrying
confidently to my assigned cell, through the courtyard surrounded
by prison buildings, and even outstripping the jailer by a shoulder
(like a horse that hurries, without the urging of whip or reins,
home to where the oats are waiting), I sometimes even forgot to
glance at the square church rising into an octagon. It stood apart
in the middle of the courtyard quadrangle. Its "muzzles" were
not machine—made of glass reinforced with iron rods as they
were in the main section of the prison. They were rotten, un—
planed gray boards, pure and simple—and they indicated: the
building‘s second—rank priority. What they maintained there was
a kind of intra—Butyrki transit prison, so to speak, for recently
sentenced prisoners.

And at one time, in 1945, I had experienced it as a big, im—
portant step when they led us into the church after our OSO
