196 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

sight of those wretched—and truly sacred—parcels tore at one‘s
heartstrings.

That was what this human being had earned for sixty—three
years of honesty and doubts.

The four cots in our cell left an aisle in the middle, where the
table stood. But several days after my arrival, they put a fifth per—
son in with us and inserted a cot crosswise.

They brought in the newcomer an hour before rising time—
that brief, sweetly cerebral last hour, and three of us did not lift
our heads. Only Kramarenko jumped up, to sponge some to—
bacco, and maybe, with it, some material for the interrogator.
They began to converse in a whisper, and we tried not to listen.
But it was quite impossible not to overhear the newcomer‘s
whisper. It was so loud, so disquieting, so tense, and so close to a
sob, that we realized it was no ordinary grief that had entered
our cell. The newcomer was asking whether many were shot.
Nonetheless, without turning my head, I called them down, asking
them to talk more quietly.

When, on the signal to rise, we all instantly jumped up (lying
abed earned you the punishment cell), we saw a general, no
less! True, he wasn‘t wearing any insignia of rank, not even
tabs—nor could one see where his insignia had been torn off
or unscrewed, but his expensive tunic, his soft overcoat, indeed
his entire figure and face, told us that he was unquestionably
a general, in fact a typical general, and most certainly a full
general, and not one of your run—of—the—mill major generals. He
was short, stocky, very broad of shoulder and body, and notably
fat in the face, but this fat, which had been acquired by eating
well, endowed him, not with an appearance of good—natured
accessibility, but with an air of weighty importance, of affiliation
with the highest ranks. The crowning part of his face was, to be
sure, not the upper portion, but the lower, which resembled a
bulldog‘s jaw. It was there that his energy was concentrated,
along with his will and authoritativeness, which were what had
enabled him to attain such rank by early middle age.

We introduced ourselves, and it turned out that L. V. Z———v
