The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 35

turn would and did come; he was arrested or else politely invited
to an interrogation, where he was asked just one question: Had
he been a member of such and such, from then till then? (There
were also questions about hostile activity, but the first question
decided everything, as is clear to us now, decades later.) From
there on his fate might vary. Some were put immediately in one
of the famous Tsarist central prisons—fortunately, all the
Tsarist central prisons had been well preserved—and some
socialists even ended up in the very same cells and with the very
same jailers they had had before. Others were offered the oppor—
tunity of going into exile—oh, not for long, just for two or
three years. And some had it even easier: they were merely given
a minus (a certain number of cities were forbidden) and told
to pick out a new place of residence themselves, and for the
future would they please be so kind as to stay fixed in that one
place and await the pleasure of the GPU.

This whole operation was stretched out over many years be—
cause it was of primary importance that it be stealthy and un—
noticed. It was essential to clean out, conscientiously, socialists
of every other stripe from Moscow, Petrograd, the ports, the
industrial centers, and, later on, the outlying provinces as well.
This was a grandiose silent game of solitaire, whose rules were
totally incomprehensible to its contemporaries, and whose out—
lines we can appreciate only now. Someone‘s far—seeing mind,
someone‘s neat hands, planned it all, without letting one wasted
minute go by. They picked up a card which had spent three
years in one pile and softly placed it on another pile. And the
person who had been imprisoned in a central prison was thereby
shifted into exile—and a good way off. Someone who had served
out a "minus" sentence was sent into exile, too, but out of sight
of the rest of the "minus" category, or else from exile to exile,
and then back again into the central prison—but this time a
different one. Patience, overwhelming patience, was the trait of
the person playing out the solitaire. And without any noise,
without any outcry, the members of all the other parties slipped
gradually out of sight, lost all connection with the places and
people where they and their revolutionary activities were known,
and thus—imperceptibly and mercilessly—was prepared the
annihilation of those who had once raged against tyranny at
