160 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

As the folk saying goes: If you speak for the wolf, speak against
him as well.

Where did this wolf—tribe appear from among our people?
Does it really stem from our own roots? Our own blood?

It is our own.

And just so we don‘t go around flaunting too proudly the white
mantle of the just, let everyone ask himself: "If my life had turned
out differently, might I myself not have become just such an ex—
ecutioner?"

It is a dreadful question if one really answers it honestly.

I remember my third year at the university, in the fall of 1938.
We young men of the Komsomol were summoned before the Dis—
trict Komsomol Committee not once but twice. Scarcely bothering
to ask our consent, they shoved an application form at us: You‘ve
had enough physics, mathematics, and chemistry; it‘s more im—
portant to your country for you to enter the NKVD school.
(That‘s the way it always is. It isn‘t just some person who needs
you; it is always your Motherland. And it is always some official
or other who speaks on behalf of your Motherland and who
knows what she needs. )

One year before, the District Committee had conducted a drive
among us to recruit candidates for the air force schools. We
avoided getting involved that time too, because we didn‘t want
to leave the university—but we didn‘t sidestep recruitment then
as stubbornly as we did this time.

Twenty—five years later we could think: Well, yes, we under—
stood the sort of arrests that were being made at the time, and
the fact that they were torturing people in prisons, and the slime
they were trying to drag us into. But it isn‘t true! After all, the
Black Marias were going through the streets at night, and we
were the same young people who were parading with banners
during the day. How could we know anything about those arrests
and why should we think about them? All the provincial leaders
had been removed, but as far as we were concerned it didn‘t mat—
ter. Two or three professors had been arrested, but after all they
hadn‘t been our dancing partners, and it might even be easier
