302 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

The people‘s courts handled ordinary misdemeanors and non—
political criminal cases. They were not empowered to impose
death sentences, and, laughable as it seems, the people‘s court
could not, in fact, impose sentences exceeding ftwo years. Up to
July, 1918, the heritage of the Left SR‘s still endured in our ju—
dicial proceedings. Only by special intervention of the govern—
ment and only individually were impermissibly lenient sentences
raised to fwenty years." From July, 1918, on, the people‘s courts
were given the right to hand down sentences of up to five years.
And in 1922, when all threats of war had died down, the people‘s
courts got the right to impose sentences of up to fen years and lost
the right to sentence anyone to less than six months.

From the beginning, the circuit courts and the Revtribunals
had the power to impose the death sentence, but they lost it for
a brief period: the circuit courts in 1920, and the Revtribunals
in 1921. There were many tiny ups and downs in this period
which only a historian pursuing all the details of those years
would be able to trace.

Perhaps that historian will seek out the documents and un—
roll for us the scroll of tribunal sentences and also the statistics.
(Though probably not. Whatever time and events failed to
destroy was destroyed by persons interested in having such ma—
terial disappear.) We know only that the Revtribunals were not
asleep. They were handing down sentences right—and left. And we
know, too, that every time a city was captured during the Civil
War the event was marked not only by gunsmoke in the court—
yards of the Cheka, but also by sleepless sessions of the tribunal.
And you did not have to be a White officer, a senator, a land—
owner, a monk, a Cadet, an SR, or an Anarchist in order to get
your bullet. Soft white uncallused hands alone were sufficient in
those years. But one can also hazard the guess that in Izhevsk or
Votkinsk, Yaroslavl or Murom, Kozlov or Tambov, the uprisings
were very costly as well to those who had callused workers‘ hands.
And if those scrolls—of both the extrajudicial executions and
those by tribunal—are unrolled for us someday, the most surpris—
ing thing will be the number of ordinary peasants we find on
them. Because there was no end to the number of peasant up—
risings and revolts from 1918 to 1921, even though they did not

8. See Part III, Chapter 1.
