524 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

yourself don‘t know whether you would rather keep going in
torment just to get there sooner, or whether you‘d rather be put
in a transit prison to recover a little.

But the convoy guards begin to hustle and bustle. They come
out with their overcoats on and knock their gunstocks on the
floor. That means they are going to unload the whole car.

First the convoy forms up in a circle at the car steps, and
no sooner have you dropped, fallen, tumbled down them, than
the guards shout at you deafeningly in unison from all sides
(as they have been taught): "Sit down, sit down, sit down!"
This is very effective when several voices are shouting it at once
and they don‘t let you raise your eyes. It‘s like being under
shellfire, and involuntarily you squirm, hurry (and where is there
for you to hurry to?), crouch close to the ground, and sit down,
having caught up with those who disembarked earlier.

"Sit down!" is a very clear command, but if you are a new
prisoner, you don‘t yet understand it. When I heard this com—
mand on the switching tracks in Ivanovo, I ran, clutching my
suitcase in my arms (if a suitcase has been manufactured out in
freedom and not in camp, its handle always breaks off and al—
ways at a difficult moment), and set it down on end on the ground
and without looking around to see how the first prisoners were
sitting, sat down on the suitcase. After all, to sit down right
on the ties, on the dark oily sand, in my officer‘s coat, which was
not yet so very dirty and which still had uncut flaps! The chief
of the convoy—a ruddy mug, a good Russian face—broke into a
run, and I hadn‘t managed to grasp what he wanted and why
until I saw that he meant, clearly, to plant his sacred boot in
my cursed back but something restrained him. However, he
didn‘t spare his polished toe and kicked the suitcase and smashed
in the top. "Sit down!" he gritted by way of explanation. Only at
that point did it dawn on me that I towered over the surround—
ing zeks, and without even having the chance to ask: "How
am I supposed to sit down?" I already understood how, and
sat down in my precious coat, like everybody else, just as dogs
sit at gates and cats at doors.

(I still have that suitcase, and even now when I chance to
come upon it, I run my fingers around the hole torn in it. It is a
wound which cannot heal as wounds heal on bodies or on hearts.
Things have longer memories than people.)
