104 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

smart, if . . . if the matter concerns only themselves! But that‘s
rarely so. A struggle is inevitable.

Another variant of persuasion is particularly appropriate to
the Party member. "If there are shortages and even famine in
the country, then you as a Bolshevik have to make up your mind:
can you admit that the whole Party is to blame? Or the whole
Soviet government?" "No, of course not!" the director of the
flax depot hastened to reply. "Then be brave, and shoulder the
blame yourself!" And he did!

3. Foul language is not a clever method, but it can have a
powerful impact on people who are well brought up, refined,
delicate. I know of two cases involving priests, who capitulated
to foul language alone. One of them, in the Butyrki in 1944, was
being interrogated by a woman. At first when he‘d come back
to our cell he couldn‘t say often enough how polite she was. But
once he came back very despondent, and for a long time he
refused to tell us how, with her legs crossed high, she had begun
to curse. (I regret that I cannot cite one of her little phrases
here.)

4. Psychological contrast was sometimes effective: sudden
reversals of tone, for example. For a whole or part of the inter—
rogation period, the interrogator would be extremely friendly,
addressing the prisoner formally by first name and patronymic,
and promising everything. Suddenly he would brandish a paper—
weight and shout: "Foo, you rat! I‘ll put nine grams of lead in
your skull!" And he would advance on the accused, clutching
hands outstretched as if to grab him by the hair, fingernails like
needles. (This worked very, very well with women prisoners.)

Or as a variation on this:; two interrogators would take turns.
One would shout and bully. The other would be friendly, almost
gentle. Each time the accused entered the office he would tremble
—which would it be? He wanted to do everything to please the
gentle one because of his different manner, even to the point of
signing and confessing to things that had never happened.

5. Preliminary humiliation was another approach. In the
famous cellars of the Rostov—on—the—Don GPU (House 33),
which were lit by lenslike insets of thick glass in the sidewalk
above the former storage basement, prisoners awaiting inter—
rogation were made to lie face down for several hours in the
main corridor and forbidden to raise their heads or make a
