138 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

previously unknown to mankind! The Organs altogether freed
themselves of the burden of obtaining proof! Trembling and pale,
the rabbit who had been caught, deprived of the right to write
anyone, phone anyone, bring anything with him from freedom,
~deprived too of sleep, food, paper, pencils, and even buttons,
seated on a bare stool in the corner of an office, had to try to find
out for himself and display to that loafer of an interrogator proof
that he did not have hostile intentions. If he could not discover
such proof (and where would he find it?), by that very failure he
provided the interrogation with approximate proof of his guilt!

I knew of a case in which a certain old man who had been a
prisoner in Germany managed nonetheless, sitting there on his
bare stool and gesturing with his cold fingers, to prove to his
monster of an interrogator that he did not betray his Motherland
and even that he did not have any such intention! It was a
scandal! And what happened? Did they free him? Of course not
—after all, he told me about this in Butyrki and not on Tverskoi
Boulevard in the middle of Moscow. At that point a second inter—
rogator joined the first and they spent a quiet evening reminisc—
ing with the old man. Then the two interrogators signed witnesses‘
affidavits stating that in the course of the evening the hungry,
sleepy old man had engaged in anti—Soviet propaganda! Things
were said innocently—but they weren‘t listened to innocently.
The old man was then turned over to a third interrogator, who
quashed the treason indictment and neatly nailed him with that
very same tenner for Anti—Soviet Agitation during his interroga—
tion.

Given that interrogations had ceased to be an attempt to get at
the truth, for the interrogators in difficult cases they became a
mere exercise of their duties as executioners and in easy cases
simply a pastime and a basis for receiving a salary.

And easy cases always existed, even in the notorious year |
1937. For example, Borodko was accused of having visited his
parents in Poland sixteen years before without having a passport
for foreign travel. (His papa and mama lived all of ten versts—six
miles—away, but the diplomats had signed away that part of
Byelorussia to Poland, and in 1921 people had not yet gotten used
to that fact and went back and forth as they pleased.) The inter—
rogation took just half an hour. Question: Did you go there?
