From Island to Island | 595

My name? I am the Interstellar Wanderer! They have tightly
bound my body, but my soul is beyond their power.

I know: after several hours of inevitable processing of my
body—confinement in a box, search, issuing receipts, filling out
the admissions card, after the roaster and the bath—I shall be
taken to a cell with two domes, with a hanging arch in the middle
(all the cells are like that), with two large windows and a long
combination table and cupboard. And I shall be greeted by
strangers who are certain to be intelligent, interesting, friendly
people, and they will begin to tell me their stories, and I will
begin to tell them mine, and by night we will not even feel like
going off to sleep right away.

And on the bowls will be stamped (so we shouldn‘t make off
with them on the prisoner transport) the mark "Bu—Tyur"—for
Butyrskaya Tyurma, Butyrki Prison. The "BuTyur" Health Re—
sort, as we mocked it last time. A health resort, incidentally, very
little known to the paunchy bigwigs who want so badly to lose
weight. They drag their stomachs to Kislovodsk, and go out for
long hikes on prescribed trails, do push—ups, and sweat for a
whole month just to lose four to six pounds. And there in the
"BuTyur" Health Resort, right near them, anyone of them could
lose seventeen or eighteen pounds just like that, in one week,
without doing any exercises at all.

This is a tried and true method. It has never failed.

One of the truths you learn in prison is that the world is small,
very small indeed. True, the Gulag Archipelago, although it ex—
tended across the entire Soviet Union, had many fewer inhabi—
tants than the Soviet Union as a whole. How many there actually
were in the Archipelago one cannot know for certain. We can
assume that at any one time there were not more than twelve
million in the camps‘ (as some departed beneath the sod, the
Machine kept bringing in replacements). And not more than
half of them were politicals. Six million? Well, that‘s a small
country, Sweden or Greece, and in such countries many people

1. According to the researches of the Social Democrats Nicolaevsky and
Dallin, there were from fifteen to twenty million prisoners in the camps.
