The Law Becomes a Man | 361

Chernov, at the Fourth Congress of the SR‘s, had said that the
Party would "counterpose all its forces against any attack on the
rights of the people, as it had" under Tsarism. (And everyone
remembered how it had done that.) Gots had said. "If the auto—
crats at Smolny also infringe on the Constituent Assembly . . . the
Socialist Revolutionary Party will remember its old tried and true
tactics."

Perhaps it did remember, but it didn‘t make up its mind to
act. Yet apparently it could be tried for it anyway.

"In this area of our investigation," Krylenko complained, be—
cause of conspiracy "there will be little testimony from witnesses."
And he continued: "This has made my task extremely difficult. . . .
In this area [i.e., terrorism] it is necessary, at certain moments, to
wander about in the shadows.""*

What made Krylenko‘s task difficult was the fact that the use
of terrorism against the Soviet government was discussed at the
meeting of the SR Central Committee in 1918 and rejected. And
now, years later, it was necessary to prove that the SR‘s had been
engaged in self—deception.

The SR‘s had said at the time that they would not resort to
terrorism until and unless the Bolsheviks began to execute so—
cialists. Or, in 1920, they had said that if the Bolsheviks were to
threaten the lives of SR hostages, then the party would take up
arms.""

So the question then was: Why did they qualify their renunci—
ation of terrorism? Why wasn‘t it absolute? And how had they
even dared to think about taking up arms! "Why were there no
statements equivalent to absolute renunciation?" (But, Comrade
Krylenko, maybe terrorism was their "second nature"?)

The SR Party carried out no terrorist acts whatever, and this
was clear even from Krylenko‘s summing up of the charges. But
the prosecution kept stretching such facts as these: One of the
defendants had in mind a plan for blowing up the locomotive of a
train carrying the Council of People‘s Commissars to Moscow.
That meant the Central Committee of the SR‘s was guilty of ter—
rorism. And the terrorist Ivanova had spent one night near the
railroad station with one charge of explosives—which meant

24. Krylenko, op. cit., p. 236. (What lingo!)
25. It was evidently all right to shoot the other hostages.
