318 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

"And who filled out the passes for Meshcherskaya—Grevs?"
Krylenko insisted. They hadn‘t materialized out of thin air, cer—
tainly? No, the chief accuser "does not wish to say that Solovyev
was an accessory in this case, because . . . because there is in—
sufficient evidence," but he advances the hypothesis that "citizens
still at liberty who were in danger of being caught with their
hands in the till" might have sent Solovyev to the Taganka jail.

This was the perfect time to question Libert and Rottenberg,
and they were subpoenaed, but they didn‘t appear! Just like that!
They didn‘t show up. They declined to. All right, in that case
question Meshcherskaya—Grevs! And—can you imagine it?—
this broken—down aristocrat, too, was so brazen as not to appear
before the Revtribunal! And there was no way to force her to!
Godelyuk had recanted—and was dying. Kosyrev refused to
admit anything! Solovyev was not guilty of anything! So there
was no one to question.

What witnesses, on the other hand, did indeed appear before
the tribunal, and of their own free will! The Deputy Chief of the
Cheka, Comrade Peters. And even Feliks Edmundovich Dzer—
zhinsky himself. He arrived in a state of alarm. His long, burning
zealot‘s face confronted the tribunal—whose members sat with
sinking hearts—and he testified passionately in defense of the
totally innocent Kosyrev and his high moral, revolutionary, and
professional qualities. This testimony, alas, has not been pre—
served for us, but Krylenko refers to it this way: "Solovyev and
Dzerzhinsky portrayed Kosyrev‘s wonderful qualites."*" (Alas,
you careless shavetail, you! In twenty years‘ time, in the Lub—
yanka, they are going to remind you of that trial!) It is easy to
guess what Dzerzhinsky could have said: that Kosyrev was an
iron Chekist, merciless to their enemies; that he was a good
comrade. A hot heart, a cool head, clean hands.

And from the garbage heap of slander, the bronze knight
Kosyrev rises before our eyes. Furthermore, his whole biography
testifies to his remarkable will. Before the Revolution he was
convicted several times—most often for murder. In the city of
Kostroma, he was convicted of worming his way by deception
into the house of an old woman named Smirnova and strangling
her with his own hands; then of an attempt to kill his own father;

40. Krylenko, op. cit., p. 522.
