The Law Matures | 401

actually was a member of the quiet, do—nothing illegal Moscow
Bureau of the Mensheviks—but they didn‘t know that at the
trial. He was processed in the second echelon and received a
mere eight.) The GPU had its own design: two from the Supreme
Council of the Economy, two from the People‘s Commissariat
of Trade, two from the State Bank, one from the Central Union
of Consumer Cooperatives, one from the State Planning Com—
mission. (What a boring and unoriginal plan! Back in 1920,
they had ordered, in the matter of the "Tactical Center," that it
include two from the Union of Rebirth, two from the Council of
Public Figures, two from this and that, etc.) Therefore they
picked the individuals who suited them on the basis of their
positions. And whether they were Mensheviks or not depended
on whether one believed rumors. Some who got caught this way
were not Mensheviks at all, but directives had been given to
consider them Mensheviks. The genuine political views of those
accused did not interest the GPU in the least. Not all the de—
fendants even knew each other. And they raked in Menshevik
witnesses, too, wherever they could find them.*" (All the wit—
nesses, without exception, were later given prison terms too.)
Ramzin testified prolifically and obligingly at this trial also. But
the GPU pinned its hopes on the principal defendant, Vladimir
Gustavovich Groman (with the idea that he would kelp work up
this case and be amnestied in return), and on the provocateur
Petunin. (I am basing all this on Yakubovich‘s report.)

Let us now introduce M. P. Yakubovich. He had begun his
revolutionary activity so early that he had not even finished the
gymnasium. In March, 1917, he was already Chairman of the
Smolensk Soviet. Impelled by the strength of his convictions,
which continued to lead him on, he became a strong and success—
ful orator. At the Congress of the Western Front, he impetuously
called those journalists who were demanding that the war con—
tinue enemies of the people. And this was in April, 1917. He was

33. One was Kuzma A. Gvozdev, a man whose fate was bitter. This was
the same Gvozdev who had been chairman of the workers‘ group in the War
Industry Committee, and whom the Tsarist government, in an excess of
stupidity, had arrested in 1916, and the February Revolution had made Min—
ister of Labor. Gvozdev became one of the martyr long—termers of Gulag. I
do not know how many years he had been imprisoned before 1930, but from

1930 on he was in prison continuously, and my friends knew him in Spassk
Camp, in Kazakhstan, as late as 1952.
