44 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

of the Economy) and Gosplan (the State Planning Commission)
—the more the number of plans increased, and the more those
plans overlapped and conflicted with one another, the clearer
became the old engineers‘ basic commitment to wrecking, their
insincerity, slyness, venality. The Sentinel of the Revolution nar—
rowed its eyes with even greater vigilance—and wherever it di—
rected its narrowed gaze it immediately discovered a nest of
wreckers.

This therapy continued full speed from 1927 on, and immedi—
ately exposed to the proletariat all the causes of our economic
failures and shortages. There was wrecking in the People‘s Com—
missariat of Railroads—that was why it was hard to get aboard a
train, why there were interruptions in supplies. There was wreck—
ing in the Moscow Electric Power System—and interruptions in
power. There was wrecking in the oil industry—hence the short—
age of kerosene. There was wrecking in textiles—hence nothing
for a workingman to wear. In the coal industry there was colossal
wrecking—hence no heat! In the metallurgy, defense, machinery,
shipbuilding, chemical, mining, gold and platinum industries, in
irrigation, everywhere there were these pus—filled boils of wreck—
ing! Enemies with slide rules were on all sides. The GPU puffed
and panted in its efforts to grab off and drag off the "wreckers."
In the capitals and in the provinces, GPU collegiums and prole—
tarian courts kept hard at work, sifting through this viscous
sewage, and every day the workers gasped to learn (and some—
times they didn‘t learn) from the papers of new vile deeds. They
learned about Palchinsky, von Meck, and Velichko,"" and how
many others who were nameless. Every industry, every factory,
and every handicraft artel had to find wreckers in its ranks, and
no sooner had they begun to look than they found them (with the
help of the GPU). If any prerevolutionary engineer was not yet
exposed as a traitor, then he could certainly be suspected of being
one.

And what accomplished villains these old engineers were! What
diabolical ways to sabotage they found! Nikolai Karlovich von
Meck, of the People‘s Commissariat of Railroads, pretended to

20. A. F. Velichko, a military engineer, former professor of the Military
Academy of the General Staff, and a lieutenant general, had been in charge of
the Administration for Military Transport in the Tsarist War Ministry. He
was shot. Oh, how useful he would have been in 1941!
