322 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

She had sure rubbed the salt in. . . . She knew too much. . . .

And Kosyrev had to be sacrificed too. They shot him. It was
for the health of the others.

Can it really be that someday we will read the old Lubyanka
archives? No, they will burn them. They already have.

As the reader can see for himself, this was a very unimportant
case. We didn‘t have to dwell on it. But here is a different one.

D. The Case of the "Churchmen"—January 11—16, 1920

This case, in Krylenko‘s opinion, is going to have a "suitable
place in the annals of the Russian Revolution." Right there in
the annals, indeed! It took one day to wring Kosyrev‘s neck, but
in this case they dragged things out for five whole days.

The principal defendants were: A. D. Samarin (a famous
man in Russia, the former chief procurator of the Synod; a man
who had tried to liberate the church from the Tsar‘s yoke, an
enemy of Rasputin whom Rasputin had forced out of office);*
Kuznetsov, Professor of Church Law at Moscow University; the
Moscow archpriests Uspensky and Tsvetkov. (The accuser him—
self had this to say about T‘svetkov: "An important public figure,
perhaps the best that the clergy could produce, a philanthropist." )

Their guilt lay in creating the "Moscow Council of United
Parishes," which had in turn recruited, from among believers
forty to eighty years old, a voluntary guard for the Patriarch
(unarmed, of course), which had set up permanent day and night
watches in his residence, who were charged with the responsi—
bility, in the event of danger from the authorities to the Patriarch,
of assembling the people by ringing the church alarm bells and by
telephone, so that a whole crowd might follow wherever the
Patriarch might be taken and beg—and there‘s your counter—
revolution for you!—the Council of People‘s Commissars to re—
lease him!

What an ancient Russian—Holy Russian—scheme! To as—
semble the people by ringing the alarm bells . . . and proceed in
a crowd with a petition!

48. But accuser Krylenko saw no difference whatever between Samarin and
Rasputin.
