The Ports of the Archipelago | 555

all the women not in Ozerlag, but in Dubrovlag—in Temnikov,
in Mordvinia. And so all those same women, enjoying all the
conveniences of Gulag travel, were dragged through this same
Sverdlovsk Transit Prison—to the west. In 1951 new Special
Camps were set up in Kemerovo Province (Kamyshlag)—and
that turned out to be where the women‘s labor was required. And
those ill—fated women were again put to the torment of being sent
to the Kemerovo camps through that same accursed Sverdlovsk
Transit Prison. The time came for liberation—but not for all of
them. All those women who were left to drag out their terms in
the midst of the general Khrushchev relaxation were once again
swung out of Siberia through the Sverdlovsk Transit Prison—into
Mordvinia: it was thought better to have them all together.

Well, after all, we have our own self—contained economy. The
isles are all our own. And the distances aren‘t so very great for a
Russian.

And the same sort of thing happened to individual zeks, the
more unfortunate ones. Shendrik was a big, merry, open—faced
fellow, and he labored honestly, as they say, in one of the
Kuibyshev camps and had no intimation of the evil fate over—
taking him. But this evil fate struck nonetheless. An urgent order
arrived at the camp—not just from anybody but from the Minister
of Internal Affairs himself! (And how could the Minister know of
Shendrik‘s existence?) The order was to deliver this Shendrik to
Prison No. 18 in Moscow immediately. They grabbed him,
dragged him off to the Kuibyshev Transit Prison, and from there
to Moscow with no delay. But not to some Prison No. 18; instead,
with all the rest, he went to the widely known Krasnaya Presnya
Prison. (Shendrik didn‘t know about any Prison No. 18. No one
had told him.) But his misfortune did not drowse. No more than
two days had passed before they jferked him onto a prisoner trans—
port again and this time took him all the way to Pechora. The
landscape outside the train window grew ever sparser and grim—
mer. Shendrik was alarmed: he knew there was an order from the
Minister, and here they were rapidly hauling him off to the North,
and that meant that the Minister had some awful evidence against
him. In addition to all the other torments of the trip, they stole
three days of bread rations from him while he was en route. And
by the time he got to Pechora he was staggering. Pechora greeted
