Tyurzak | 457

after 1917, the first swelling of a new knob could be felt, and
there, there, splaying out and with the slogan "You don‘t have
the right!"—it began to thrust upward again, and to narrow to a
point and harden, to acquire a horny surface—until by 1938 it
was pinning the human being right in that gap between the collar—
bone and the neck: tyurzak!‘ And once a year, the single stroke
of a watchman‘s bell could be heard in the night in the distance:
"TONnnnnn!"

If we pursue this parabola with the help of one of the prisoners
in the Schliisselburg Fortress near St. Petersburg, we find that in—
itially things were pretty bad." The prisoner had a number, and
no one called him by his family name; the gendarmes acted as if
they had been trained in the Lubyanka. They didn‘t speak a word
on their own. If you stammered out: "We . . . ," the reply came:
"Speak only for yourself!" The silence of the grave. The cell was
in eternal shadows, the windows were frosted glass, the floor
asphalt. The hinged ventilation pane in the window was open for
forty minutes a day. The food consisted of grits and cabbage soup
without meat. They would not allow you any scholarly books
from the library. You wouldn‘t see another human being for two
years at a stretch. Only after three years would they let you have
sheets of paper—numbered.* And then, little by little, things got
to be more lenient as the point of the horn got rounded off; there
was white bread; and then the prisoners were allowed tea and
sugar; one could have money and could buy things in addition
to the rations; smoking was permitted; they put transparent glass
in the windows; and the transom could be kept open all the time;
they painted the walls a light color; in no time at all you could
get books by subscribing to the St. Petersburg library; there
were gratings between the garden plots; one could converse
through them, and prisoners even delivered lectures to other
prisoners. By then the prisoners were urging the prison adminis—
tration: "Give us more land to work on, more!" So they planted

1. Tyurzak=TYURemnoye ZAKlyucheniye=prison confinement. Tyurzak is
an official term.

2. TON=Tyurma Osobogo Naznacheniya=Special Purpose Prison. TON is
likewise an official abbreviation.

3. Vera Figner, Zapechatlenny Trud: Vospominaniya v Dvukh Tomakh
(Impressed Labor: Memoirs in Two Volumes), Moscow, "Mysl," 1964.

4. According to the account of M. Novorussky, from 1884 to 1906 three
prisoners in Schliisselburg committed suicide and five others went insane.
