The Supreme Measure | 433

or even ten years in our camps are harder to bear than were the
punishments of Elizabeth?

In today‘s terms, Elizabeth had a universally human point of
view on all this, while the Empress Catherine the Great had, on
the contrary, a class point of view (which was consequently more
correct). Not to execute anyone at all seemed to her appalling and
indefensible. She found capital punishment entirely appropriate
to defending herself, her throne, and her system—in other words,
in political cases, such as those of Mirovich, the Moscow plague
mutiny, and Pugachev. But for habitual criminals, for nonpolitical
offenders, why not consider capital punishment abolished?

Under Paul, the abolition of capital punishment was confirmed.
(Despite his many wars, there were no military tribunals attached
to military units.) And during the whole long reign of Alex—
ander I, capital punishment was introduced only for war crimes
that took place during a campaign (1812). (Right at this point,
some people will say to us: What about deaths from running the
gantlet? Yes, indeed, there were, of course, hidden executions—
for that matter, one can literally drive a person to death with a
trade—union meeting!) But the yielding up of one‘s God—given life
because others, sitting in judgment, have so voted simply did not
take place in our country even for crimes of state for an entire
half—century—from Pugachevy to the Decembrists.

The blood of the five Decembrists whetted the appetite of our
state. From then on, execution for crimes of state was no longer
prohibited nor was it forgotten, right up to the February Revolu—
tion in 1917. It was confirmed by the Statutes of 1845 and 1904,
and further reinforced by the criminal statutes of the army and
navy.

And how many people were executed in Russia during that
period? We have already, in Chapter 8 above, cited the figures
given by liberal leaders of 1905—1907. Let us add to them the
verified figures of N. S. Tagantsev, the expert on Russian criminal
law.‘ Up until 1905, the death penalty was an exceptional
measure in Russia. For a period of thirty years—from 1876 to
1904 (the period of the Narodnaya Volya revolutionaries and
the use of terrorism—a terrorism which did not consist merely

1. N. S. Tagantsev, Smertnaya Kazn (Capital Punishment), St. Petersburg,
1913. ‘
