First Cell, First Love | 205

press you, rob you of the inclination to talk, read, think, and
even of any desire to eat the meager food.

People in the cells sometimes discussed how the Lubyanka
system and schedule, and those in other prisons as well, had come
into being, whether through calculated brutality or as a matter
of chance. My opinion is that both factors are involved. The
rising time is, obviously, a matter of malicious intent, but much
of the rest evolved automatically at first (which is true of many
of the brutalities of life generally) and was then discovered by
the powers that be to be useful and was therefore made permanent.
The shifts change at 8 a.M. and 8 P.M., and it was more con—
venient for everyone to take the prisoners to the toilet at the end
of a shift. (Letting them out singly in the middle of the day was
extra trouble and meant extra precautions, and no one got paid
for that.) The same was true of the business with eyeglasses: Why
should one worry about that at 6 a.M.? They could be returned
to the owners just before the end of the shift instead.

So now we heard them being brought around—doors were
being opened. We could guess whether someone wore them in the
cell next door. (And didn‘t your codefendant wear spectacles?
But we didn‘t feel up to knocking out a message on the wall.
This was punished very severely.) A moment later they would
bring the eyeglasses to our cell. Fastenko used them only for
reading. But Susi needed them all the time. He could stop squint—
ing once he‘d put them on. Thanks to his horn—rimmed glasses
and straight lines above the eyes, his face became severe, per—
spicacious, exactly the face of an educated man of our century as
we might picture it to ourselves. Back before the Revolution he
had studied at the Faculty of History and Philology of the Uni—
versity of Petrograd, and throughout his twenty years in inde—
pendent Estonia he had preserved intact the purest Russian
speech, which he spoke like a native. Later, in Tartu, he had
studied law. In addition to Estonian, he spoke English and Ger—
man, and through all these years he continued to read the London
Economist and the German scientific "Berichte" summaries. He
had studied the constitutions and the codes of law of various
countries—and in our cell he represented Europe worthily and
with restraint. He had been a leading lawyer in Estonia and been
known as "kuldsuu"—meaning "golden—tongued."
