The Ports of the Archipelago | 539

were simply built into the sides, up and down which prisoners
on their last legs, on the verge of dying, had to clamber like
sailors (a structure which would have adorned a ship more
appropriately than a port). In the winter of 1944—1945, when
everyone had a roof over his head, there was room for only 7,500
prisoners, and fifty of them died every day, and the stretchers on
which they were carried to the morgue were never idle. (People
will object that this was quite acceptable—a death rate of less
than one percent per day—and that, given that sort of turnover,
a person might manage to last five months. Yes, but the main
killer was camp labor, and that hadn‘t even begun yet for transit
prisoners. This loss of two—thirds of one percent per day repre—
sents sheer shrinkage, and it would be intolerably high even in
some vegetable warehouses.)

The deeper into the Archipelago one got, the more obviously
did the concrete docks of the Archipelago become transformed
into wharves made of wooden pilings.

In the course of several years, half a million people passed
through Karabas, the transit camp near Karaganda, whose name
became a byword in the language. (Yuri Karbe was there in
1942 and was already registered in the 4331d thousand.) The
transit prison consisted of low rammed—earth barracks with
earthen floors. Daily recreation there consisted in driving all the
prisoners out with their things and putting artists to work white—
washing the floor and even painting carpets on it, and then in
the evening the zeks would lie down on it, and their bodies would
rub out both the whitewash and the carpets.*

The Knyazh—Pogost transit point (latitude 63 degrees north)
consisted of shacks built on a swamp. Their pole frames were
covered with torn tarpaulin tenting that didn‘t quite reach the
ground. The double bunks inside them were also made of poles
(from which, incidentally, the branches had been only partially
removed), and the aisle was floored with poles also. During the
day, the wet mud squelched through the flooring, and at night it
froze. In various parts of the area, the walkways were laid on
frail and shaky poles and here and there people whom weakness

4. Of all the transit prisons Karabas was worthiest of becoming a museum.
But, alas, it no longer exists: in its place there is a factory for reinforced—
concrete products.
