The Law Matures | 391

ship of society, is not this precisely where all social cybernetics
is leading today? Is it not true that professional politicians are
boils on the neck of society that prevent it from turning its head
and moving its arms?) And why shouldn‘t engineers have politi—
cal views? After all, politics is not even a science, but is an em—
pirical area not susceptible to description by any mathematical
apparatus; furthermore, it is an area subject to human egotism
and blind passion. (Even in the trial Charnovsky speaks out:
"Politics must, nonetheless, be guided to some degree by the
findings of technology.")

The wild pressures of War Communism could only sicken the
engineers. An engineer cannot participate in irrationality, and
until 1920 the majority of them did nothing, even though they
were barbarically impoverished. When NEP—the New Eco—
nomic Policy—got under way, the engineers willingly went back
to work. They accepted NEP as an indication that the govern—
ment had come to its senses. But, alas, conditions were not what
they had been. The engineers were looked on as a socially sus—
picious element that did not even have the right to provide an
education for its own children. Engineers were paid immeasur—
ably low salaries in proportion to their contribution to produc—
tion. But while their superiors demanded successes in production
from them, and discipline, they were deprived of the authority to
impose this discipline. Any worker could not only refuse to
carry out the instructions of an engineer, but could insult and
even strike him and go unpunished—and as a representative of
the ruling class the worker was always right in such a case.

Krylenko objects: "Do you remember the Oldenborger trial?"
(In other words, how we, so to speak, defended him.)

Fedotov: "Yes. He had to lose his life in order to attract some
attention to the predicament of the engineer."

Krylenko (disappointed) : "Well, that was not how the matter
was put."

Fedotov: "He died and he was not the only one to die. He
died voluntarily, and many others were killed."*"*

Krylenko was silent. That meant it was true. (Leaf through
the Oldenborger trial again, and just imagine the persecution.
And with the additional final line: "Many other were killed.")

21. Ibid., p. 228.
