The Law Matures | 423

finished!" But Vlasov thought it did not befit a Communist to run
away.) The next morning there was a nasty article in the district
paper on the work of the District Consumer Cooperative. (One
has to point out that in 1937 the press always played hand in
glove with the NKVD.) By evening Vlasov had been asked to
give the District Party Committee an accounting of his own work.
(Every step of the way, this was how things were in the entire
Soviet Union.)

This was 1937, the second year of the so—called "Mikoyan
prosperity" in Moscow and other big cities. And even today, in
the reminiscences of journalists and writers, one gets the impres—
sion that at the time there was already plenty of everything. This
concept seems to have gone down in history, and there is a danger
of its staying there. And yet, in November, 1936, two years after
the abolition of bread rationing, a secret directive was published
in Ivanovo Province (and in other provinces) prohibiting the
sale of flour. In those years many housewives in small towns, and
particularly in villages, still used to bake their own bread. Pro—
hibiting the sale of flour meant: Do not eat bread! In the district
center of Kady, long bread lines formed such as had never before
been seen. (However, they attacked that problem, too, by for—
bidding the baking of black bread in district centers, permitting
only expensive white bread to be baked.) The only bakery in the
whole Kady District was the one in the district center, and people
began to pour into the center from the villages to get black bread.
The warehouses of the District Consumer Cooperative had flour,
but the two parallel prohibitions blocked off all avenues by which
it could be made available to the public! Vlasov, however, man—
aged to find a way out of the impasse, and despite the clever gov—
ernment rulings he kept the district fed for a whole year: he went
out to the collective farms and got eight of them to agree to set up
public bakeries in empty "kulak" huts (in other words, they
would simply bring in firewood and set the women to baking in
ordinary Russian peasant ovens, but, mind you, ovens which were
now socialized, publicly not privately owned). The District Con—
sumer Cooperative would undertake to supply them with flour.
There is eternal simplicity to a solution once it has been dis—
covered! Without building any bakeries (for which he had no
funds), Vlasov set them up in one day. Without carrying on a
