586 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

to the destination. They don‘t know that this is a testing by
clubs, and that those who lie down and stay lying down and don‘t
go on despite the clubs are picked up by carts following behind.
That‘s organizational experience for you! (And one can ask:
Why, then, didn‘t they take them all on carts in the first place?
But where could enough carts be found? And horses? After all,
we have tractors. What about the price of oats nowadays?) Such
transports as these were still common in 1948—1950.

And in the twenties, transport on foot was one of the basic
methods. I was a small boy, but I remember very well how they
drove them down the streets of Rostov—on—the—Don without any
qualms. And the famous order: ". . . will open fire without warn—
ing!" had a different ring at that time, again because of a differ—
ence in technology: after all, the convoy often had only sabers.
They used to deliver orders like this: "One step out of line and
the convoy guard will shoot and slash!" That had a very powerful
sound: "shoot and slash!" You could imagine them cutting off
your head from behind.

Yes, and even in February, 1936, they drove on foot through
Nizhni Novgorod a transport of long—bearded old men from the
other side of the Volga, in their homespun coats and in real lapty
—bast sandals—wrapped around with onuchi—Russian peasant
footcloths—"Old Russia disappearing." And all of a sudden,
right across their path, came three automobiles, in one of
which rode the Chairman of the Central Executive Committee,
President of the Soviet Union, this is to say, Kalinin. The
prisoner transport halted. Kalinin went on through. He wasn‘t
interested.

Shut your eyes, reader. Do you hear the thundering of wheels?
Those are the Stolypin cars rolling on and on. Those are the red
cows rolling. Every minute of the day. And every day of the year.
And you can hear the water gurgling—those are prisoners‘ barges
moving on and on. And the motors of the Black Marias roar.
They are arresting someone all the time, cramming him in some—
where, moving him about. And what is that hum you hear? The
overcrowded cells of the transit prisons. And that cry? The com—
plaints of those who have been plundered, raped, beaten to
within an inch of their lives.
