350 | THE GULAG ARCHIPEL AGO

elected by their votes. Not understanding the times, he had seen
as his task the liberation of the church from politics "because it
had suffered much from politics in the past." This was the Metro—
politan who was tried in:

I. The Petrograd Church Trial—June 9—July 5, 1922

The defendants, charged with resisting the requisition of church
valuables, numbered several dozen in all, including a professor
of theology and church law, archimandrites, priests, and laymen.
Semyonov, the presiding judge of the tribunal, was twenty—five
years old and, according to rumor, had formerly been a baker.
The chief accuser was a member of the collegium of the People‘s
Commissariat of Justice, P. A. Krasikov—a man of Lenin‘s age
and a friend of Lenin when he was in exile in the Krasnoyarsk
region and, later on, in emigration as well. Vladimir Ilyich used
to enjoy hearing him play the violin.

Out on Nevsky Prospekt, and at the Nevsky turn—off, a dense
crowd waited every day of the trial, and when the Metropolitan
was driven past, many of them knelt down and sang: "Save, O
Lord, thy people!" (It goes without saying that they arrested
overzealous believers right on the street and in the court building
also.) Most of the spectators in the court were Red Army men,
but even they rose every time the Metropolitan entered in his
white ecclesiastical hood. Yet the accuser and the tribunal called
him an enemy of the people. Let us note that this term already
existed.

From trial to trial, things closed in on the defense lawyers, and
their humiliating predicament was already very apparent. Kry—
lenko tells us nothing about this, but the gap is closed by an eye—
witness. The tribunal roared out a threat to arrest Bobrishchev—
Pushkin Ahimself—the principal defense lawyer—and this was
already so in accord with the spirit of the times, and the threat
was so real that Bobrishchev—Pushkin made haste to hand over his
gold watch and his billfold to lawyer Gurovich. And right then
and there the tribunal actually ordered the imprisonment of a
witness, Professor Yegorov, because of his testimony on behalf
of the Metropolitan. As it turned out, Yegorov was quite pre—
pared for this. He had a thick briefcase with him in which he had
packed food, underwear, and even a small blanket.
