600 | THE GULAG aARCHIPELAGO

who had founded the Brain Institute in Moscow, had asked to
have two talented graduate students sent abroad to work with
him permanently. And that was how Timofeyev—Ressovsky and
his friend Tsarapkin had been sent off on a foreign assignment
with no time limit. And even though they did not have any
ideological guidance there, they nonetheless achieved great things
in science, and when in 1937 (!) they were instructed to return
to their homeland, this seemed to them, since it meant inter—
rupting their work, impossible. They could not abandon either the
logical continuation of their own researches or their apparatus
or their students. And, no doubt, they also couldn‘t do it because
back in the Motherland they would have been compelled to pour
shit publicly all over their fifteen years of work in Germany. And
only that would have earned them the right to go on existing (and
would it have earned it for them?). And so they became non—
returnees, remaining patriots nevertheless.

In 1945 the Soviet armies entered Buch (a northeast suburb
of Berlin), and Timofeyev—Ressovsky and his entire institute
joyously welcomed them: everything had worked out in the best
possible way, and now he would not have to be separated from
his institute! Soviet representatives came to inspect it and said:
"Hmm! hmm! Put everything in packing cases, and we‘ll take it
all to Moscow." "That‘s impossible," Timofeyev objected. "Every—
thing will die on the way. The installations have taken years to
set up." "Hmm!" The bigwigs acted astonished. And very shortly
after that Timofeyev and Tsarapkin were arrested and taken off
to Moscow. They were naive. They had thought that the institute
would not be able to operate without them. Well, even if it didn‘t
operate, the general line of the Party must triumph! In the Big
Lubyanka it was very easily proven to the arrested individuals
that they were traitors of the Motherland (or to it?), and they
were sentenced to ten years, and now the President of the Scien—
tific and Technical Society of Cell 75 took heart from the thought
that he hadn‘t made any errors.

In the Butyrki cells, the arched metal frames supporting the
bunks were very, very low. Even the prison administration had
never thought of having prisoners sleep under them. Therefore,
you first tossed your neighbor your coat so that he could spread it
out for you under there, and then you lay face down in the aisle
