The Interrogation | 121

lectuals. You will put it together yourselves and bring it to me
all wrapped up." Yes, that‘s so! An intellectual cannot reply
with the delightful incoherence of Chekhov‘s "Malefactor." He
is bound to try to build up in logical form the whole story he is
being accused of, no matter how much falsehood it contains.

But the interrogator—butcher isn‘t interested in logic; he
just wants to catch two or three phrases. He knows what he
wants. And as for us—we are totally unprepared for anything.

From childhood on we are educated and trained—for our
own profession; for our civil duties; for military service; to take
care of our bodily needs; to behave well; even to appreciate
beauty (well, this last not really all that much!). But neither our
education, nor our upbringing, nor our experience prepares us
in the slightest for the greatest trial of our lives: being arrested
for nothing and interrogated about nothing. Novels, plays, films
(their authors should themselves be forced to drink the cup of
Gulag to the bottom!) depict the types one meets in the offices
of interrogators as chivalrous guardians of truth and humani—
tarianism, as our loving fathers. We are exposed to lectures on
everything under the sun—and are even herded in to listen to
them. But no one is going to lecture to us about the true and
extended significance of the Criminal Code; and the codes them—
selves are not on open shelves in our libraries, nor sold at news—
stands; nor do they fall into the hands of the heedless young.

It seems a virtual fairy tale that somewhere, at the ends of
the earth, an accused person can avail himself of a lawyer‘s help.
This means having beside you in the most difficult moment of
your life a clear—minded ally who knows the law.

The principle of our interrogation consists further in depriv—
ing the accused of even a knowledge of the law.

An indictment is presented. And here, incidentally, is how
it‘s presented: "Sign it." "It‘s not true." "Sign." "But I‘m not
guilty of anything!" It turns out that you are being indicted
under the provisions of Articles 58—10, Part 2, and 58—11 of the
Criminal Code of the Russian Republic. "Sign!" "But what do
these sections say? Let me read the Code!" "I don‘t have it."
"Well, get it from your department head!" "He doesn‘t have it
either. Sign!" "But I want to see it." "You are not supposed to
see it. It isn‘t written for you but for us. You don‘t need it. I‘ll
tell you what it says: these sections spell out exactly what you
