212 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

flected, not a secondhand Sun, but the real one! The real, eternally
living Sun itself! Or its golden diffusion through the spring clouds.

Spring promises everyone happiness—and tenfold to the pris—
oner. Oh, April sky! It didn‘t matter that I was in prison. Evi—
dently, they were not going to shoot me. And in the end I would
become wiser here. I would come to understand many things
here, Heaven! I would correct my mistakes yet, O Heaven, not
for them but for you, Heaven! I had come to understand those
mistakes here, and I would correct them!

As if from a pit, from the far—off lower reaches, from Dzer—
zhinsky Square, the hoarse earthly singing of the automobile
horns rose to us in a constant refrain. To those who were dashing
along to the tune of those honkings, they seemed the trumpets
of creation, but from here their insignificance was very clear.

The walk in the fresh air lasted only twenty minutes, but how
much there was about it to concern oneself with; how much one
had to accomplish while it lasted.

In the first place, it was very interesting to try to figure out
the layout of the entire prison while they were taking you there
and back, and to calculate where those tiny hanging courtyards
were, so that at some later date, out in freedom, one could walk
along the square and spot their location. We made many turns
on the way there, and I invented the following system: Starting
from the cell itself, I would count every turn to the right as plus
one, and every turn to the left as minus one. And, no matter how
quickly they made us turn, the idea was not to try to picture it
hastily to oneself, but to count up the total. If, in addition,
through some staircase window, you could catch a glimpse of the
backs of the Lubyanka water nymphs, half—reclining against the
pillared turret which hovered over the square itself, and you could
remember the exact point in your count when this happened, then
back in the cell you could orient yourself and figure out what
your own window looked out on.

And during that outdoor walk you concentrated on breathing
as much fresh air as possible.

There, too, alone beneath that bright heaven, you had to im—
agine your bright future life, sinless and without error.

There, too, was the best place of all to talk about the most
dangerous subjects. It didn‘t matter that conversation during the
