168 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

ponsibility than others and that, consequently, it is his duty to
force a prisoner‘s head between his legs, and then to shove him
like that into a pipe . ..

Why shouldn‘t he?

I credited myself with unselfish dedication. But meanwhile I
had been thoroughly prepared to be an executioner. And if I had
gotten into an NKVD school under Yezhov, maybe I would have
matured just in time for Beria.

So let the reader who expects this book to be a political exposé
slam its covers shut right now.

If only it were all so simple! If only there were evil people
somewhere insidiously committing evil deeds, and it were neces—
sary only to separate them from the rest of us and destroy them.
But the line dividing good and evil cuts through the heart of
every human being. And who is willing to destroy a piece of his
own heart?

During the life of any heart this line keeps changing place;
sometimes it is squeezed one way by exuberant evil and some—
times it shifts to allow enough space for good to flourish. One
and the same human being is, at various ages, under various cir—
cumstances, a totally different human being. At times he is close
to being a devil, at times to sainthood. But his name doesn‘t
change, and to that name we ascribe the whole lot, good and evil.

Socrates taught us: Know thyself!

Confronted by the pit into which we are about to toss those
who have done us harm, we halt, stricken dumb: it is after all
only because of the way things worked out that they were the
executioners and we weren‘t.

If Malyuta Skuratov had summoned us, we, too, probably
would have done our work well!

From good to evil is one quaver, says the proverb.

And correspondingly, from evil to good.

From the moment when our society was convulsed by the
reminder of those illegalities and tortures, they began on all
sides to explain, to write, to protest: Good people were there too
—meaning in the NKVD—MGBI!

We know which "good" people they are talking about: they
were the ones who whispered to the old Bolsheviks: "Don‘t
weaken," or even sneaked a sandwich in to them, and who
kicked all the rest around wherever they found them. But
