608 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

Emperor was really insane, and had been easy on the rest of them
because of class considerations. But I had hardly pulled myself
together to ask how Medvedev regarded all this than they took
him off "with his things." Certain circumstances led us to con—
clude that he had been taken off to be released. And this con—
firmed those first rumors of the Stalinist amnesty which reached
our ears that summer, the amnesty for no one, an amnesty after
which everything was just as crowded as before—even under the
bunks.

They took my neighbor, an elderly Schutzbiindler, off to a
prisoner transport. (Here in the land of the world proletariat, all
those Schutzbiindlers who had been suffocating in conservative
Austria had been roasted with "tenners," and on the islands
of the Archipelago they met their end.) And there was a swarthy
little fellow with coal—black hair and feminine—looking eyes like
dark cherries, but with a broad, larger than usual nose that
spoiled his whole face, turning it into a caricature. For a day he
and I lay next to each other in silence, and on the second day he
found occasion to ask me: "What do you think I am?" He spoke
Russian correctly and fluently, but with an accent. I hesitated:
there seemed to be something of Transcaucasia in him, Armenian
presumably. He smiled: "I used to pass myself off very easily as
a Georgian. My name was Yasha. Everyone laughed at me. I
collected trade—union dues." I looked him over. His was truly a
comical figure: a half—pint, his face out of proportion, asym—
metrical, his smile amiable. And then suddenly he tensed up, his
features sharpened, his eyes narrowed and cut me like the stroke
of a black saber.

"I am an intelligence officer of the Rumanian General Staff!
Lieutenant Vladimirescu!"

I started—this was real dynamite. I had met a couple of hun—
dred fabricated spies, and I had never thought I might meet up
with a real one. I thought they didn‘t exist.

According to his story, he was of an aristocratic family. From
the age of three he had been destined to serve on the General Staff.
At six he had entered the intelligence service school. Growing
up, he had picked his own field of future activity—the Soviet
Union, taking into account that here in Russia the most relentless
counterintelligence service in the world existed and that it was
