220 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

the gypsies? No, even worse, thrown us to the dogs? Does she
really remain our mother? If a wife has become a whore, are we
really still bound to her in fidelity? A Motherland that betrays its
soldiers—is that really a Motherland?

And everything turned topsy—turvy for Yuri! He used to take
pride in his father—now he cursed him! For the first time he
began to consider that his father had, in essence, betrayed his oath
to that army in which he had been brought up—had betrayed it
in order to help establish this system which now betrayed its own
soldiers. Why, then, was Yuri bound by his own oath to that
traitorous system?

When, in the spring of 1943, recruiters from the first Byelorus—
sian "legions" put in an appearance, some POW‘s signed up with
them to escape starvation. Yuri went with them out of conviction,
with a clear mind. But he didn‘t stay in the legion for long. As
the saying goes: "Once they‘ve skinned you, there‘s no point in
grieving over the wool." By this time Yuri had given up hiding
his excellent knowledge of German, and soon a certain Chief, a
German from near Kassel, who had been assigned to create an
espionage school with an accelerated wartime output, took Yuri
as his right—hand man. And that was how Yuri began the down—
ward slide he had not foreseen. That was how things got turned
around. Yuri passionately desired to free his Motherland, and
what did they do but shove him into training spies? The Germans
had their own plans. Just where could one draw the line? Which
step was the fatal one? Yuri became a lieutenant in the German
Army. He traveled through Germany, in German uniform, spent
some time in Berlin, visited Russian émigrés, and read authors
like Bunin, Nabokov, Aldanov, Amfiteatrov, whose works were
forbidden at home. Yuri had anticipated that in all their writing,
in Bunin‘s, for example, the blood flowing from Russia‘s living
wounds would pour from every page. What was wrong with
them? To what did they devote their unutterably precious free—
dom? To the female body, to ecstasy, sunsets, the beauty of noble
brows, to anecdotes going back to dusty years. They wrote as if
there had been no revolution in Russia, or as if it were too com—
plex for them to explain. They left it to young Russian people to
find for themselves what was highest in life. And Yuri dashed
back and forth, in a hurry to see, in a hurry to know, and mean—
