The Law Matures | 419

It was all that same invincible theme song, persisting with only
minor variations through so many different trials: "Affer all, we
and you are Communists! How could you have gotten off the
track and come out against us? Repent! After all, you and we
together—is us/"

Historical comprehension ripens slowly in a society. And when
it does ripen, it is so simple. Neither in 1922, nor in 1924, nor
in 1937 were the defendants able to hang onto their own point
of view so firmly that they could raise their heads and shout, in
reply to that bewitching and anesthetizing melody:

"No, we are not revolutionaries with you! No, we are not Rus—
sians with you! No, we are not Communists with you!"

It would seem that if only that kind of shout had been raised,
all the stage sets would have collapsed, the plaster masks would
have fallen off, the Producer would have fled down the backstairs,
and the prompters would have sneaked off into their ratholes. And
out of doors it would have been, say, 1967!

But even the most superbly successful of these theatrical pro—
ductions was expensive and troublesome. And Stalin decided not
to use open trials any longer.

Or rather in 1937 he probably did have a plan for holding public
trials on a wide scale in the local districts—so the black soul of
the opposition would be made visible to the masses. But he
couldn‘t find producers who were good enough. It wasn‘t practical
to prepare things so carefully, and the mental processes of the
accused weren‘t so complex, and Stalin only got into a mess,
although very few people know about it. The whole plan broke
down after a few trials, and was abandoned.

It‘s appropriate here to describe one such trial—the Kady case,
detailed reports of which the Ivanovo provincial newspapers
published initially.

At the end of 1934, a new local administrative district was
created in the remote wilds of Ivanovo Province at the point
where it joined Kostroma and Nizhni Novgorod Provinces, and
its center was situated in the ancient, slow—moving village of Kady.
New leaders were sent there from various localities, and they
