422 | THE GULAG ARCHIPEL AGO

the business effectively and, in addition, tried hard; people pro—
moted from the ranks of the proletariat knew nothing and, more
importantly, didn‘t want to know anything.) Nonetheless the
NKVD was prepared to make its peace with the trade cooperative!
Sorokin, the Deputy Chairman of the District NKVD, came in
person to see Vlasov with a peace proposal: to give the NKVD
700 rubles‘ worth of materials without charging them for it (and
later on we will somehow write it off). (The ragpickers! And that
was two months‘ wages for Vlasov, who had never taken anything
illegally for himself.) "And if you don‘t give it to us, you are going
to regret it." Vlasov kicked him out: "How do you dare offer me,
a Communist, a deal like that?" The very next day Krylov paid a
call on the District Consumer Cooperative, this time as the rep—
resentative of the District Commiittee of the Party. (This mas—
querade, like all these tricks, was in the spirit of 1937.) And this
time he ordered the convening of a Party meeting; the agenda:
"On the wrecking activities of Smirnov and Univer in the Con—
sumers‘ Cooperatives," the report to be delivered by Comrade
Vlasov. Well, now, that‘s a gem of a trick for you! No one at that
point was making charges against Vlasov. But it would be quite
enough for him to say two little words about the wrecking ac—
tivities of the former secretary of the District Party Committee
in his, Vlasov‘s, field, and the NKVD would interrupt: "And
where were you? Why didn‘t you come to us in time?" In a situa—
tion of this sort many others would have lost their heads and
allowed themselves to be trapped. But not Vlasov! He immedi—
ately replied: "I won‘t make the report! Let Krylov make the
report—after all, he arrested Smirnov and Univer and is handling
their case." Krylov refused: "I‘m not familiar with the evidence."
Vlasov replied: "If even you aren‘t familiar with the evidence,
that means they were arrested without cause." So the Party
meeting simply didn‘t take place. But how often did people dare
to defend themselves? (We will not have a complete picture of
the atmosphere of 1937 if we lose sight of the fact that there were
still strong—willed people capable of difficult decisions, and if we
fail to recall that late that night T., the senior bookkeeper of the
District Consumer Cooperative, and his deputy N. came to
Viasov‘s office with 10,000 rubles: "Vasily Grigoryevich! Get out
of town tonight! Don‘t wait for tomorrow. Otherwise you are
