The Ships of the Archipelago | 521

The Minister beat him, of course, not because of the pears and
not because of his valid rebuke to the French, but to find out by
whom and when he had been recruited. And, of course, the
prison term they handed him was twenty—five years.

There are many such stories, but like every railroad car, the
Stolypin falls silent at night. At night there won‘t be any fish, nor
water, nor going to the toilet.

And the car is filled then with the steady noise of the wheels,
which doesn‘t in the least break the silence. And if, in addition,
the convoy guard has left the corridor, one can talk quietly from
the third compartment for men with the fourth, or women‘s, com—
partment.

A conversation with a woman in prison is quite special. There
is something noble about it, even if one talks only about articles
of the Code and prison terms.

One such conversation went on all night long, and here are
the circumstances in which it took place. It was in July, 1950.
There were no passengers in the women‘s compartment except for
one young girl, the daughter of a Moscow doctor, sentenced under
Article 58—10. And there was a big to—do in the men‘s compart—
ment. The convoy guards began to drive all the zeks out of three
compartments into two (and don‘t even ask how many they piled
up in there). And they brought in some offender who was not at
all like a convict. In the first place, he hadn‘t had his head shaved
and his wavy blond locks, real curls, lay seductively on his big,
thoroughbred head. He was young, dignified, and dressed in a
British military uniform. He was escorted through the corridor
with an air of deference (the convoy itself had been a little awed
by the instructions on the envelope containing his case file).
And the girl had managed to catch a glimpse of the whole
episode. But he himself had not seen her. (And how much he
regretted that later!)

From the noise and the commotion she realized that the com—
partment next to hers had been emptied for him. It was obvious
that he was not supposed to communicate with anyone—all the
more reason for her to want to talk with him. It wasn‘t possible
in a Stolypin to see from one compartment into another, but
when everything was still, you could hear between them. Late
at night, when things had begun to quiet down, the girl sat on the
