426 | THEB GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

so that the case wouldn‘t be left without a prosecutor. The formal
indictment, solemn, menacing, and lengthy, came down in essence
to the charge that an underground Rightist Bukharinite group
had existed in Kady District, which had been formed in Ivanovo
(in other words, you could expect arrests in Ivanovo too), and
had as its purpose the overthrow by wrecking of the Soviet gov—
ernment in the village of Kady (and this was about the remotest
boondock in all Russia the rightists could have found for a
starting point!).

The prosecutor petitioned the court to have Stavrov‘s testi—
mony, given before his death in prison, read to the court and
accepted as evidence. In fact, the whole charge against the group
was based on Stavrov‘s evidence. The court agreed to include the
testimony of the deceased, just as if he were alive. (With the
advantage, however, that none of the defendants could refute it.)

But darkest Kady did not appreciate these scholarly fine points.
It waited to see what came next. The testimony of Stavrov, who
had been killed under interrogation, was read to the court and
once again became part of the record. The questioning of the
defendants began—and immediately there was chaos. A// of them
repudiated the testimony they had given during the interrogation.

It is not clear how, in such an event, things would have been
arranged in the October Hall of the House of the Unions in Mos—
cow—but here, at any rate, it was decided shamelessly to
continue. The judge rebuked the defendants: How could you have
given different testimony during the interrogation? Univer, very
weak, replied in a barely audible voice: "As a Communist I
cannot, in a public trial, describe the interrogation methods of
the NKVD." (Now there was a model for the Bukharin trial!
Now that‘s what keeps them together! More than anything else,
they are worried that people might think ill of the Party. Their
judges had long since stopped worrying about that.)

During the recess, Klyugin visited the cells of the defendants.
He said to Vlasov: "You‘ve heard how Smirnov and Univer
played the whore, the bastards? You‘ve got to admit your guilt
and tell the whole truth!" "The truth and nothing but the truth,"
willingly agreed Vlasov, who had not yet weakened. "The truth
and nothing but the truth that you are every bit as bad as the
German Fascists!" Klyugin flew into a rage: "Listen here, you
