First Cell, First Love | 193

than expected, and everyone went back to Russia, and then there
was one more Revolution. Fastenko no longer felt his former
passion for these revolutions. But he returned, compelled by the
same need that urges birds to their annual migrations.*"

There was much about Fastenko I could not yet understand.
In my eyes, perhaps the main thing about him, and the most
surprising, was that he had known Lenin personally. Yet he was
quite cool in recalling this. (Such was my attitude at the time
that when someone in the cell called Fastenko by his patronymic
alone, without using his given name—in other words simply
"Ilyich," asking: "Ilyich, is it your turn to take out the latrine
bucket?"—I was utterly outraged and offended because it seemed
sacrilege to me not only to use Lenin‘s patronymic in the same
sentence as "latrine bucket," but even to call anyone on earth
"Tlyich" except that one man, Lenin.) For this reason, no doubt,
there was much that Fastenko would have liked to explain to me
that he still could not bring himself to.

Nonetheless, he did say to me, in the clearest Russian: "Thou
shalt not make unto thee any graven image!" But I failed to
understand him!

Observing my enthusiasm, he more than once said to me
insistently: "You‘re a mathematician; it‘s a mistake for you to
forget that maxim of Descartes: ‘Question everything!" Ques—
tion everything!"‘ What did this mean—"everything"? Certainly
not everything! It seemed to me that I had questioned enough
things as it was, and that was enough of that!

Or he said: "Hardly any of the old hard—labor political pris—

10. Soon after Fastenko returned to the Motherland, he was followed by
a Canadian acquaintance, a former sailor on the battleship Potemkin, one of the
mutineers, in fact, who had escaped to Canada and become a well—to—do
farmer there. This former Potemkin sailor sold everything he owned, his farm
and cattle, and returned to his native region with his money and his new
tractor to help build sacred socialism, He enlisted in one of the first agricultural
communes and donated his tractor to it. The tractor was driven any which way
by whoever happened along and was quickly ruined, And the former Potermkin
sailor saw things turning out very differently from the way he had pictured
them for twenty years. Those in charge were incompetents, issuing orders that
any sensible farmer could see were wild nonsense, In addition, he became
skinnier and skinnier, and his clothes wore out, and nothing was left of the
Canadian dollars he had exchanged for paper rubles. He begged to be allowed
to leave with his family, and he crossed the border as poor as when he fied
from the Potemkin. He crossed the ocean, just as he had done then, working

his way as a sailor, because he had no money for passages, and back in Canada
he began life all over again as a hired hand on a farm.
