272 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

nor houses? It was virtually the job of the State Planning Com—
mission to assign to the MVD the number of workers required
for plan fulfillment and thus the number to be arrested. An
ammnesty, a broad and generous amnesty, was what we waited
for and thirsted for! Somebody said that in England prisoners were
amnestied on the anniversary of the coronation, in other words,
every year. Many politicals had been amnestied on the three
hundredth anniversary of the Romanovs, in 1912. Could it really
be possible that now, after we had won a victory which would
resound throughout our entire era and even longer, the Stalin
government would be petty and vengeful and would hang onto
its resentment of every stumble and slip of each of its minuscule
subjects?

There is a simple truth which one can learn only through suffer—
ing: in war not victories are blessed but defeats. Governments
need victories and the people need defeats. Victory gives rise to
the desire for more victories. But after a defeat it is freedom that
men desire—and usually attain. A people needs defeat just as an
individual needs suffering and misfortune: they compel the
deepening of the inner life and generate a spiritual upsurge.

The Poltava victory was a great misfortune for Russia: it
resulted in two centuries of great strain and stress, ruin, the ab—
sence of freedom—and war and war again. The Poltava victory
spelled salvation for the Swedes. Having lost the appetite for war,
the Swedes became the most prosperous and the freest people in
Europe.""

We are so used to taking pride in our victory over Napoleon
that we leave out of account the fact that because of it the eman—
cipation of the serfs did not take place a half—century sooner.
Because of it, the strengthened monarchy destroyed the Decem—
brists. (The French occupation was never a reality for Russia.)
But the Crimean War, and the Japanese War, and our war with
Germany in the First World War—all those defeats brought us
freedom and revolution.

We believed in amnesty that spring, we weren‘t being at all
original in this. Talking with old prisoners, one gradually dis—
covers that this thirst for mercy and this faith in mercy is never
absent within gray prison walls. For decades and decades, wave

17. Perhaps, only in the twentieth century, if one is to believe the stories
one hears, has their stagnating well—being led to moral indigestion.
