First Cell, First Love | 213

walk was forbidden. One simply had to know how to manage it.
The compensation was that in all likelihood you could not be over—
heard either by a stoolie or by a microphone.

During these walks I tried to get into a pair with Susi. We
talked together in the cell, but we liked to try talking about the
main things here. We hadn‘t come together quickly. It took some
time. But he had already managed to tell me a great deal. I
acquired a new capability from him: to accept patiently and pur—
posefully things that had never had any place in my own plans
and had, it seemed, no connection at all with the clearly outlined
direction of my life. From childhood on, I had somehow known
that my objective was the history of the Russian Revolution and
that nothing else concerned me. To understand the Revolution I
had long since required nothing beyond Marxism. I cut myself
off from everything else that came up and turned my back on it.
And now fate brought me together with Susi. He breathed a com—
pletely different sort of air. And he would tell me passionately
about his own interests, and these were Estonia and democracy.
And although I had never expected to become interested in
Estonia, much less bourgeois democracy, I nevertheless kept
listening and listening to his loving stories of twenty free years
in that modest, work—loving, small nation of big men whose ways
were slow and set. I listened to the principles of the Estonian con—
stitution, which had been borrowed from the best of European
experience, and to how their hundred—member, one—house parlia—
ment had worked. And, though the why of it wasn‘t clear, I began
to like it all and store it all away in my experience." I listened
willingly to their fatal history: the tiny Estonian anvil had, from
way, way back, been caught between two hammers, the Teutons
and the Slavs. Blows showered on it from East and West in turn;
there was no end to it, and there still isn‘t. And there was the well—
known (totally unknown) story of how we Russians wanted to
take them over in one fell swoop in 1918, but they refused to
yield. And how, later on, Yudenich spoke contemptuously of their
Finnish heritage, and we ourselves christened them "White Guard
Bandits." Then the Estonian gymnasium students enrolled as
volunteers. We struck at Estonia again in 1940, and again in

19. Susi remembered me later as a strange mixture of Marxist and democrat.
Yes, things were wildly mixed up inside me at that time.
