The Interrogation | 107

enemies.") Remember the Tatar who bore his sufferings—his
own and those of his wife—but could not endure his daughter‘s!
In 1930, Rimalis, a woman interrogator, used to threaten: "We‘ll
arrest your daughter and lock her in a cell with syphilitics!" And
that was a woman!

They would threaten to arrest everyone you loved. Sometimes
this would be done with sound effects: Your wife has already
been arrested, but her further fate depends on you. They are
questioning her in the next room—just listen! And through the
wall you can actually hear a woman weeping and screaming.
(After all, they all sound alike; you‘re hearing it through a wall;
and you‘re under terrific strain and not in a state to play the
expert on voice identification. Sometimes they simply play a
recording of the voice of a "typical wife"—soprano or contralto
—a labor—saving device suggested by some inventive genius.)
And then, without fakery, they actually show her to you through
a glass door, as she walks along in silence, her head bent in
grief. Yes! Your own wife in the corridors of State Security! You
have destroyed her by your stubbornness! She has already been
arrested! (In actual fact, she has simply been summoned in
connection with some insignificant procedural question and sent
into the corridor at just the right moment, after being told:
"Don‘t raise your head, or you‘ll be kept here!") Or they give
you a letter to read, and the handwriting is exactly like hers: "I
renounce you! After the filth they have told me about you, I
don‘t need you any more!" (And since such wives do exist in
our country, and such letters as well, you are left to ponder in
your heart: Is that the kind of wife she really is?)

The interrogator Goldman (in 1944) was trying to extort
testimony against other people from V. A. Korneyeva with the
threat: "We‘ll confiscate your house and toss your old women
into the street." A woman of deep convictions, and firm in her
faith, Korneyeva had no fear whatever for herself. She was pre—
pared to suffer. But, given our laws, Goldman‘s threats were
all too real, and she was in torment over the fate of her loved
ones. When, by morning, after a night of tearing up rejected
depositions, Goldman began to write a fourth version accusing
Korneyeva alone, she signed it happily and with a feeling of
spiritual victory. We fail to hang on to the basic human instinct
