480 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

so to speak, in both the thirties and the forties: the "muzzles"
on the windows and the frosted reinforced glass created a perma—
nent twilight in the cells (darkness is an important factor in
causing depression). They often stretched netting above the
window "muzzle," and in the winter it was covered with snow,
which cut off this last access to the light. Reading became no
more than a way of ruining one‘s eyes. In the Vladimir TON,
they made up for this lack of light at night: bright electric lights
burned all night long, preventing sleep. And in the Dmitrovsk
Prison in 1938 (N. A. Kozyrev), there was light in the evenings
and at night—a kerosene lamp on a little shelf way up near the
ceiling, that burned away and smoked up the last air; in 1939
there were electric lights that glowed red at half—voltage. Air was
"rationed" too. The hinged panes for ventilation were kept
locked, and opened only during the interval of the prisoners‘
trip to the toilet, as prisoners recall from both Dmitrovsk and
Yaroslavl prisons. (Y. Ginzburg: The bread grew moldy between
morning and lunchtime; the sheets were damp, and the walls
green.) In Vladimir in 1948 there was no lack of air, because
the transom was open permanently. Walks outdoors ranged from
fifteen to forty—five minutes at various hours in various prisons.
There was no such thing as the communication with the soil that
had existed in Schliisselburg or Solovki; everything that grew
had been torn up by the roots, trampled, covered with concrete
and asphalt. They even forbade lifting up one‘s head to the
heavens during the walks: "Look at your feet!" This was the
command both Kozyrev and Adamova remember from the Kazan
Prison. Visits from relatives were forbidden in 1937 and never
renewed. Letters could be sent to close relatives twice a month
and could be received from them in most years. (But in Kazan
they had to be returned to the administration the day after they
had been read.) Access to the commissary to make purchases
with the money sent in specifically limited amounts was usually
permitted. Furnifture was no unimportant part of the prison
regimen. Adamova wrote eloquently of her happiness at finding
a simple wooden cot with a straw mattress and a simple wooden
table in her cell in Suzdal, after having had only cots that folded
into the wall and chairs anchored to the floor. In the Vladimir
TON, I. Korneyev experienced two different prison regimens:
