The Interrogation | 123

"Article 111: The interrogator is obliged to establish clearly
all the relevant facts, both those tending toward acquittal and
any which might lessen the accused‘s measure of guilt."

But it was I who helped establish Soviet power in October!
It was I who shot Kolchak! I took part in the dispossession of
the kulaks! I saved the state ten million rubles in lowered pro—

_duction costs! I was wounded twice in the war! I have three
orders and decorations.

"You‘re not being tried for that!" History . . . the bared teeth of
the interrogator: "Whatever good you may have done has noth—
ing to do with the case."

"Article 139; The accused has the right to set forth his testi—
mony in his own hand, and to demand the right to make correc—
tions in the deposition written by the interrogator."

Oh, if we had only known that in time! But what I should
say is: If that were only the way it really was! We were always
vainly imploring the interrogator not to write "my repulsive,
slanderous fabrications" instead of "my mistaken statements," or
not to write "our underground weapons arsenal" instead of "my
rusty Finnish knife."

If only the defendants had first been taught some prison
science! If only interrogation had been run through first in re—
hearsal, and only afterward for real. . . . They didn‘t, after all,
play that interrogation game with the second—termers of 1948:
it would have gotten them nowhere. But newcomers had no ex—
perience, no knowledge! And there was no one from whom to
seek advice.

The loneliness of the accused! That was one more factor in
the success of unjust interrogation! The entire apparatus threw
its full weight on one lonely and inhibited will. From the moment
of his arrest and throughout the entire shock period of the inter—
rogation the prisoner was, ideally, to be kept entirely alone. In
his cell, in the corridor, on the stairs, in the offices, he was not
supposed to encounter others like himself, in order to avoid the
risk of his gleaning a bit of sympathy, advice, support from
someone‘s smile or glance. The Organs did everything to blot out
for him his future and distort his present: to lead him to believe
that his friends and family had all been arrested and that material
proof of his guilt had been found. It was their habit to exagger—
