First Cell, First Love | 225

the evenings. That has long been known in military medicine.
And in reserve regiments they don‘t have anything to eat in the
evening.

Then came the time for the evening visit to the toilet, for which,
in all likelihood, you had waited, all atremble, all day. How
relieved, how eased, the whole world suddenly became! How the
great questions all simplified themselves at the same instant—
did you feel it?

Oh, the weightless Lubyanka evenings! (Only weightless, in—
cidentally, if you were not awaiting a night interrogation.) A
weightless body, just sufficiently satisfied by soup so that the
soul did not feel oppressed by it. What light, free thoughts! It
was as if we had been lifted up to the heights of Sinai, and there
the truth manifested itself to us from out the fire. Was it not of
this that Pushkin dreamed:

I want to live to think and suffer!

And there we suffered, and we thought, and there was nothing
else in our lives. How easy it turned out to be to attain that ideal.

Some evenings I would get involved in arguments, withdraw—
ing from a chess game with Susi or from a book. Again I would
have the sharpest quarrels with Yuri, because the questions were
all explosive ones—for example, the question of the outcome of
the war. The jailer, without any word or change of expression,
would come in and pull down the dark—blue blackout blind on
the window. And then, out there on the other side of the blind,
evening Moscow would begin to send up salutes. And just as we
could not see the salutes lighting up the heavens, we were unable
to see the map of Europe. Yet we tried to picture it in all its
details and to guess which cities had been taken. Yuri was espe—
cially tormented by those salutes. Appealing to fate to correct his
own mistakes, he assured us that the war was by no means fin—
ished and that the Red Army and the Anglo—American forces
would now go for each other‘s throats: that the real war would
really begin now. The others in the cell took a greedy interest
in this prediction. How would such a conflict end? Yuri claimed
it would end with the easy destruction of the Red Army. (Would
this result in our liberation or our execution?) I objected to this,
and we got into heated arguments. It was his contention that our
