310 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

"And as for you and your smile, Citizeness Ivanova, we‘ll make
you pay for it, and we‘ll find a way to fix it so that you never
laugh again!"*>

So, shall we begin?

A. The Case of "Russkiye Vedomosti"

In this case, one of the earliest, free speech was on trial. On
March 24, 1918, this famous "professorial" newspaper published
an article by Savinkov entitled "En Route." They would have
much preferred to arrest Savinkov himself, but he really was en
route, damn it, and where was he to be found? So instead they
closed down the paper and brought the elderly editor, P. V.
Yegorov, to court as a defendant, insisting that he explain how
he had dared to publish the article. After all, the New Era was
four months old, and it was time to get used to it!

Yegorov naively defended himself by saying that the article
had been written by a "leading political figure whose opinion was
of general interest whether or not the editors shared it." Further—
more, he saw nothing slanderous in Savinkov‘s having said: "Let
us not forget that Lenin, Natanson, and Co. arrived in Russia
via Berlin; i.e., that the German authorities helped them return
to the homeland"—because that in actual fact was what had hap—
pened; Kaiser Wilhelm‘s embattled Germany had helped Com—
rade Lenin to return.

Krylenko retorted that he would not conduct a prosecution
for slander (why not?), and that the newspaper was on trial for
attempting to influence people‘s minds! (And how could any
newspaper dare have such a purpose!?)

The formal charge did not include Savinkov‘s phrase: "One
has to be criminally insane to affirm seriously that the interna—
tional proletariat will come to our aid" —because it still would
come to our aid. .

For attempting to influence people‘s minds, the newspaper,
which had been published since 1864 and had survived the most
fiercely reactionary periods—those of Loris—Melikov, Pobedo—
nostsev, Stolypin, Kasso, and all the rest—was ordered closed
down forever! And Yegorov, the editor—and this is a shameful

32. Ibid., p. 296.
