316 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

standing her in a very human way, explains that she had grown
used to having plenty of money, and that her insignificant salary of
500 rubles from the Supreme Council of the Economy was nothing
at all, considering that one exercise in extortion—for example,
helping a merchant get the seal removed from his store—would
net her 5,000 rubles, and another—from Meshcherskaya—Grevs,
wife of a prisoner—would bring in 17,000. For that matter,
Uspenskaya served only briefly as a mere stool pigeon. Thanks to
the help of certain big Chekists, in a few months she became
a member of the Communist Party and an interrogator.
However, we don‘t seem to be getting to the essence of the
case. Uspenskaya had arranged a meeting between this Meshch—
erskaya—Grevs and a certain Godelyuk, a bosom pal of Kosyrev,
in order to reach an agreement on her husband‘s ransom. (They
had initially demanded 600,000 rubles!) But unfortunately, by
some still unexplained means, the arrangements for that secret
meeting became known to the same attorney, Yakulov, who had
already done in the three bribe—taking interrogators and who,
evidently, felt a class hatred for the whole proletarian system of
judicial and extrajudicial processing. Yakulov denounced them to
the Moscow Revtribunal,*" and the presiding judge of the tribunal,
recalling perhaps the wrath of the Council of People‘s Commissars
in connection with the three interrogators, also blundered in
terms of class premises. Instead of simply warning Comrade
Dzerzhinsky and working it all out in the family, he hid a steno—
grapher behind the curtain. And the stenographer took down all
Godelyuk‘s references to Kosyrev, and to Solovyev and to other
commissars, and all his stories about who in the Cheka takes how
many thousands. Then, as per the stenographic record, Godelyuk
received an advance payment of 12,000 rubles, and Meshcher—
skaya—Grevs was given a pass to enter the Cheka that had already
been filled out by the Control and Auditing Collegium, by Libert
and Rottenberg. (The bargaining was to continue there, inside
the Cheka.) Then and there Godelyuk was caught! In his con—

37. In order to temper the reader‘s indignation against this leechlike snake,
Yakulov, we should point out that by the time of Kosyrev‘s trial he had already
been arrested and was in custody. They had found a case to take care of him.
He was brought in to testify accompanied by convoy, and we are certainly
entitled to hope that he was shot soon afterward. (Today we are surprised:
How did things reach such a pitch of illegality? Why did no one mount an
offensive against it?)
