344 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

created diocesan and all—Russian committees for aid to the starv—
ing and had begun to collect funds. But to have permitted any
direct help to go straight from the church into the mouths of
those who were starving would have undermined the dictatorship
of the proletariat. The committees were banned, and the funds
they had collected were confiscated and turned over to the state
treasury. The Patriarch had also appealed to the Pope in Rome
and to the Archbishop of Canterbury for assistance—but he was
rebuked for this, too, on the grounds that only the Soviet au—
thorities had the right to enter into discussions with foreigners.
Yes, indeed. And what was there to be alarmed about? The news—
papers wrote that the government itself had all the necessary
means to cope with the famine.

Meanwhile, in the Volga region they were eating grass, the
soles of shoes, and gnawing at door jambs. And, finally, in Decem—
ber, 1921, Pomgol—the State Commission for Famine Relief
—proposed that the churches help the starving by donating church
valuables—not all, but those not required for liturgical rites.
The Patriarch agreed. Pomgol issued a directive: all gifts must
be strictly voluntary! On Febraury 19, 1922, the Patriarch issued
a pastoral letter permitting the parish councils to make gifts of
objects that did not have liturgical and ritual significance.

And in this way matters could again have simply degenerated
into a compromise that would have frustrated the will of the
proletariat, just as it once had been by the Constituent Assembly,
and still was in all the chatterbox European parliaments.

The thought came in a stroke of lightning! The thought came—
and a decree followed! A decree of the All—Russian Central Execu—
tive Committee on February 26: all valuables were to be requisi—
tioned from the churches—for the starving!

The Patriarch wrote to Kalinin, who did not reply. Then on
February 28 the Patriarch issued a new, fateful pastoral letter:
from the church‘s point of view such a measure is sacrilege, and
we cannot approve the requisition.

From the distance of a half—century, it is easy to reproach the
Patriarch. Of course, the leaders of the Christian church ought
not to have been distracted by wondering whether other resources
might not be available to the Soviet government, and who it was
who had driven the Volga to famine. They ought not to have
