Arrest | 13

make it more difficult for them to sort out the mistake. And it
isn‘t just that you don‘t put up any resistance; you even walk
down the stairs on tiptoe, as you are ordered to do, so your
neighbors won‘t hear."

At what exact point, then, should one resist? When one‘s belt
is taken away? When one is ordered to face into a corner? When
one crosses the threshold of one‘s home? An arrest consists of a
series of incidental irrelevancies, of a multitude of things that do
not matter, and there seems no point in arguing about any one of
them individually—especially at a time when the thoughts of the
person arrested are wrapped tightly about the big question: "What
for?"—and yet all these incidental irrelevancies taken together
implacably constitute the arrest.

Almost anything can occupy the thoughts of a person who has
just been arrested! This alone would fill volumes. There can be
feelings which we never suspected. When nineteen—year—old

5. And how we burned in the camps later, thinking: What would things
have been like if every Security operative, when he went out at night to make
an arrest, had been uncertain whether he would return alive and had to say
good—bye to his family? Or if, during periods of mass arrests, as for example
in Leningrad, when they arrested a quarter of the entire city, people had not
simply sat there in their lairs, paling with terror at every bang of the down—
stairs door and at every step on the staircase, but had understood they had
nothing left to lose and had boldly set up in the downstairs hall an ambush of
half a dozen people with axes, hammers, pokers, or whatever else was at hand?
After all, you knew ahead of time that those bluecaps were out at night for
no good purpose. And you could be sure ahead of time that you‘d be
cracking the skull of a cutthroat. Or what about the Black Maria sitting out
there on the street with one lonely chauffeur—what if it had been driven off
or its tires spiked? The Organs would very quickly have suffered a shortage of
officers and transport and, notwithstanding all of Stalin‘s thirst, the cursed
machine would have ground to a halt!

If .. . if . . . We didn‘t love freedom enough. And even more—we had no
awareness of the real situation. We spent ourselves in one unrestrained outburst
in 1917, and then we Aurried to submit. We submitted with pleasure! (Arthur
Ransome describes a workers‘ meeting in Yaroslavl in 1921. Delegates were
sent to the workers from the Central Committee in Moscow to confer on the
substance of the argument about trade unions. The representative of the oppo—
sition, Y. Larin, explained to the workers that their trade union must be their
defense against the administration, that they possessed rights which they had
won and upon which no one else had any right to infringe. The workers, how—
ever, were completely indifferent, simply not comprekending whom they still
needed to be defended against and why they still needed any rights. When the
spokesman for the Party line rebuked them for their laziness and for getting
out of hand, and demanded sacrifices from them—overtime work without pay,
reductions in food, military discipline in the factory administration—this
aroused great elation and applause.) We purely and simply deserved everything
that happened afterward.
