152 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

earth beneath your feet was yours! The heaven above you was
yours—it was, after all, like your cap, sky blue!

The passion for gain was their universal passion. After all,
in the absence of any checking up, such power was inevitably used
for personal enrichment. One would have had to be holy to
refrain!

If we were able to discover the hidden motivation behind in—
dividual arrests, we would be astounded to find that, granted the
rules governing arrests in general, 75 percent of the time the
particular choice of whom to arrest, the personal cast of the die,
was determined by human greed and vengefulness; and of that 75
percent, half were the result of material self—interest on the part
of the local NKVD (and, of course, the prosecutor too, for on
this point I do not distinguish between them).

How, for example, did V. G. Vlasov‘s nineteen—year—long
journey through the Archipelago begin? As head of the District
Consumer Cooperatives he arranged a sale of textiles for the
activists of the local Party organization. (These materials were
of a sort and quality which no one nowadays would even touch.)
No one was bothered, of course, by the fact that this sale was not
open to the general public. But the prosecutor‘s wife was unable
to buy any: She wasn‘t there at the time; Prosecutor Rusov him—
self had been shy about approaching the counter; and Vlasov
hadn‘t thought to say: "T‘ll set some aside for you." (In fact, given
his character, he would never have said this anyway.) Further—
more, Prosecutor Rusov had invited a friend to dine in the re—
stricted Party dining room—such restricted dining rooms used to
exist in the thirties. This friend of his was not high enough in rank
to be admitted there, and the dining room manager refused to
serve him. The prosecutor demanded that Vlasov punish the man—
ager, and Vlasov refused. Vlasov also managed to insult the dis—
trict NKVD, and just as painfully. And he was therefore added
to the rightist opposition.

The motivations and actions of the bluecaps are sometimes so
petty that one can only be astounded. Security officer Senchenko
took a map case and dispatch case from an officer he‘d arrested
and started to use them right in his presence, and, by manipu—
lating the documentation, he took a pair of foreign gloves from
