The Interrogation | 135

there, toward whom I, grain of sand that I was, had expressed my
hatred. Sometimes the interrogator stood in front of the portrait
and declaimed dramatically: "We are ready to lay down our lives
for him! We are ready to lie down in the path of oncoming tanks
for his sake!" Face to face with the altarlike grandeur of that por—
trait, my mumbling about some kind of purified Leninism seemed
pitiful, and I myself seemed a blasphemous slanderer deserving
only death.

The contents of our letters provided more than enough, in
keeping with the standards of those times, to sentence us both.
Therefore my interrogator did not have to invent anything. He
merely tried to cast his noose around everyone I had ever written
to or received a letter from. I had expressed myself vehemently in
letters to friends my own age and had been almost reckless in
spelling out seditious ideas, but my friends for some reason had
continued to correspond with me! And some suspicious phrases
could be found in their replies to my letters."" And then Yezepov,
like Porfiri Petrovich, demanded that I explain it all in a coherent
way: if we had expressed ourselves in such a fashion in letters
that we knew were subject to censorship, what could we have
said to each other face to face? I could not convince him that all
my fire—eating talk was confined to my letters. And at that point,
with muddled mind, I had to undertake to weave something
credible about my meetings with my friends—meetings referred
to in my letters. What I said had to jibe with the letters, in such
a way as to be on the very edge of political matters and yet not
fall under that Criminal Code. Moreover, these explanations
had to pour forth quickly, all in one breath, so as to convince this
veteran interrogator of my naiveté, my humility, my total honesty.
The main thing was not to provoke my lazy interrogator to any
interest in looking through that accursed load of stuff I had

31. One of our school friends was nearly arrested because of me at this time.
It was an enormous relief to me to learn later that he was still free! But then,
twenty—two years later, he wrote to me: "On the basis of your published works I
conclude that you take a one—sided view of life. . . . Objectively speaking, you
have become the standard—bearer of Fascist reactionaries in the West, in West
Germany and the United States, for example. . . . Lenin, whom, I‘m convinced,
you love and honor just as much as you used to, yes, and old Marx and Engels,
too, would have condemned you in the severest fashion. Think about that!"
Indeed, I do think about that: How sorry I am that you didn‘t get arrested then!
How. much you lost!
