308 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

the creator of the law [Krylenko‘s italics] . . . and a political
weapon."** (My italies.)

Creator of the law because, for four years, there were no codes.
They had thrown out the Tsarist codes, and they had not com—
posed their own. "Don‘t tell me our criminal courts ought to act
exclusively on the basis of existing written norms. We live in the
process of Revolution.""" "A tribunal is not the kind of court in
which fine points of jurisprudence and clever stratagems are to be
restored. . . . We are creating a new law and new ethical
norms.""" And also: "No matter how much is said here about the
eternal law of truth, justice, etc., we know . . . how dearly these
have cost us.""*

(But if your prison terms are compared with ours, maybe it
didn‘t cost you so dearly after all? Maybe eternal justice was
somewhat more comfortable?)

The reason that fine points of jurisprudence are unnecessary
is that there is no need to clarify whether the defendant is guilty
or not guilty: the concept of guilt is an old bourgeois concept
which has now been uprooted.*"

And so we heard from Comrade Krylenko that a tribunal was
not that kind of court! On another occasion we would hear from
him that a tribunal was not a court at all: "A tribunal is an organ
of the class struggle of the workers directed against their enemies"
and must act "from the point of view of the interests of the revolu—
tion . . . having in mind the most desirable results for the masses
of workers and peasants.""° People are not people, but "carriers
of specific ideas.""" "No matter what the individual qualities [of
the defendant], only one method of evaluating him is to be
applied: evaluation from the point of view of class expedi—
ency."**

In other words, you can exist only if it‘s expedient for the
working class. And if "this expediency should require that the
avenging sword should fall on the head: of the defendants, then

21. Ibid., p. 3.

22. Ibid., p. 408.

23. Ibid., p. 22. (My italics.)

24. Ibid., p. 505.

25. Ibid., p. 318.

26. Ibid., p. 73. (The italics throughout are mine.)
27. Ibid., p. 83. —

28. Ibid., p. 79.
