540 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

had made clumsy fell into the water and ooze. In 1938 they fed
the prisoners in Knyazh—Pogost the same thing every day: a mash
made of crushed grits and fish bones. This was convenient be—
cause there were no bowls, spoons, or forks at the transit prison
and the prisoners had none of their own either. They were herded
to the boiler by the dozens and the mash was ladled into their
caps or the flaps of their jackets.

And in the transit prison of Vogvozdino (several miles from
Ust—Vym), where five thousand prisoners were kept at a time
(now who ever heard of Vogvozdino before this sentence? how
many such unknown transit prisons were there? and then multiply
that by 5,000), the food was liquid, but they had no bowls either.
However, they managed without them (what is there that our
Russian ingenuity cannot overcome?) by distributing the gruel
in washbasins for ten people at a time, leaving them to race each
other gulping it down."

True, no one was imprisoned in Vogvozdino longer than a
year. (The kind of prisoner who would have been imprisoned there
that long was a prisoner on his last legs whom all the camps had
refused to accept.)

The imagination of writers is poverty—stricken in regard to the
native life and customs of the Archipelago. When they want to
write about the most reprehensible and disgraceful aspect of
prison, they always accuse the latrine bucket. In literature the
latrine bucket has become the symbol of prison, a symbol of
humiliation, of stink. Oh, how frivolous can you be? Now was
the latrine bucket really an evil for the prisoner? On the contrary,
it was the most merciful device of the prison administration. The
actual horror began the moment there was no latrine bucket in
the cell.

In 1937 there were no latrine buckets in certain Siberian prisons,
or there weren‘t enough. Not enough of them had been made
ahead of time—Siberian industry hadn‘t caught up with the full
scope of arrests. There were no latrine barrels in the warehouses
for the newly created cells. There were old latrine buckets in the

5. Galina Serebryakova! Boris Dyakov! Aldan—Semyonov! Did you ever
gulp from a washbasin, ten at a time? And if you had, you would never,
of course, have descended to the "animal needs" of Ivan Denisovich, would
you? And in the midst of the mob scene at the washbasin you would have
continued to think only about your dear Party?
