First Cell, First Love | 227

the warm feeling that people in freedom were thinking about
them and were concerned for them. |

Fastenko told us that even in the Soviet period a Political Red
Cross had existed. We found this difficult to imagine. It wasn‘t
that we thought he was telling us an untruth. Somehow we just
couldn‘t picture such a thing. He told us that Y. P. Peshkova,
taking advantage of her personal immunity, had traveled abroad,
collected money there (you‘d not collect much here), and then
seen to it that foodstuffs were bought in Russia for political pris—
oners who had no relatives. For all political prisoners? And he
explained at this point that the KR‘s—the so—called "Counter—
Revolutionaries"—engineers and priests, for example, weren‘t
included, but only members of former political parties. Well,
why didn‘t you say so right away? Yes, and then for the most part
the Political Red Cross, except Peshkova, was itself liquidated
and its staff imprisoned.

It was also very pleasant, on those evenings when one wasn‘t
expecting interrogation, to talk about getting out of prison. Yes,
they said there had been astonishing instances when they did
release someone. One day they took Z———v from our cell, "with
his things"—perhaps to free him? But his interrogation could
not have been completed so swiftly. Ten days later he returned.
They had dragged him off to Lefortovo. When he got there, he
had evidently begun to sign things very quickly. So they brought
him back to us. "Now if they should just release you," we would
say to a fellow prisoner, "since your case, after all, isn‘t very
serious, as you yourself say, then you must promise to go see my
wife and, to show you‘ve done it, tell her, let‘s say, to put two
apples in my next parcel. . . . But there aren‘t any apples
anywhere right now, so tell her to put in three bagels. But then
there— mightn‘t be any bagels in Moscow either. So all right, it
will just have to be four potatoes!" (That‘s how the discussion
went, and then they actually did take N. off, "with his things,"
and M. got four potatoes in his next parcel. Truly astonishing!
It was more than a coincidence! So they had really let him go!
And his case was much more serious than mine. So maybe soon

. However, what really happened was that M.‘s wife brought
five potatoes, but one of them got crushed in her bag, and N. was
in the hold of a ship en route to the Kolyma.)
