First Cell, First Love | 195

important position. But he did not want to; instead, he accepted
a modest post on the newspaper Pravda and then a still more
modest one, and eventually he moved over to the Moscow City
Planning office, where he worked in an inconspicuous job.

I was surprised. Why had he chosen such a cul—de—sac? He ex—
plained in terms I found incomprehensible. "You can‘t teach
an old dog to live on a chain."

Realizing that there was nothing he could accomplish, Fastenko
quite simply wanted, in a very human way, to stay alive. He had
already gotten used to living on a very small pension—not one of
the "personal" pensions especially assigned by the government,
because to have accepted that sort of thing would have called
attention to his close ties to many who had been shot. And he
might have managed to survive in this way until 1953. But, to
his misfortune, they arrested another tenant in his apartment, a
debauched, perpetually drunken writer, L. S———v, who had
bragged somewhere while he was drunk about owning a pistol.
Owning a pistol meant an obligatory conviction for terrorism,
and Fastenko, with his ancient Social Democratic past, was
naturally the very picture of a terrorist. Therefore, the interroga—
tor immediately proceeded to nail him for terrorism and, simul—
taneously, of course, for service in the French and Canadian
intelligence services and thus for service in the Tsarist Okhrana
as well." And in 1945, to earn his fat pay, the fat interrogator
was quite seriously leafing through the archives of the Tsarist
provincial gendarmerie administrations, and composing entirely
serious interrogation depositions about conspiratorial nicknames,
passwords, and secret rendezvous and meetings in 1903.

On the tenth day, which was as soon as was permitted, his
old wife (they had no children) delivered to Anatoly Iyich such
parcels as she could manage to put together: a piece of black
bread weighing about ten and a half ounces (after all, it had
been bought in the open market, where bread cost 50 rubles a
pound), and a dozen peeled boiled potatoes which had been
pierced by an awl when the parcel was being inspected. And the

12. This was one of Stalin‘s pet themes—to ascribe to every arrested Bol—
shevik, and in general to every arrested revolutionary, service in the Tsarist
Okhrana. Was this merely his intolerant suspiciousness? Or was it intuition?
Or, perhaps, analogy? .
