The Law Matures | 385

out), and then the interventionists would open up the shortest
routes and would get to Moscow without wetting their feet or
their horses‘ hoofs. (And why was it so hard for the Tatars?
Why was it that Napoleon didn‘t reach Moscow? Yes! It was
because of the Polesye and the IImen swamps. And once those
swamps were drained, the capital would lie exposed.) On top
of that, don‘t forget to add that hangars had been built there
under the guise of sawmills (places not to be named!) so that
the planes of the interventionists would not get wet in the rain
and could be taxied into them. And housing for the intervention—
ists had also been built (do not name the places!). (And where
had all the homeless occupation armies been quartered in previous
wars?) The defendants had received all the directives on these
matters from the mysterious foreign gentlemen K. and R. (It is
strictly forbidden to name their names—or to name the countries
they come from!)"* And most recently they had even begun "the
preparation of treasonable actions by individual units of the Red
Army." (Do not name the branches of the service, nor the units,
nor the names of any persons involved!) True, they hadn‘t done
any of this; but they had also intended (though they hadn‘t done
that either) to organize within some central army institution a
cell of financiers and former officers of the White armies. (Ah,
the White Army? Write it down! Start making arrests!) And cells
of anti—Soviet students. (Students? Write it down! Start making
arrests!)

(Incidentally, don‘t push things too far. We wouldn‘t want the
workers to get despondent and begin to feel that everything is
falling apart, that the Soviet government has been caught nap—
ping. And so they also threw a good deal of light on that side of
it: that they had intended to do a lot and had accomplished very
little, that not one industry had suffered serious losses!)

But why didn‘t the Intervention take place anyway? For
various complex reasons. Either because Poincaré hadn‘t been
elected in France, or else because our émigré industrialists
decided that their former enterprises had not yet been sufficiently
restored by the Bolsheviks—let the Bolsheviks do more. And
then, too, they couldn‘t seem to come to terms with Poland and
Rumania.

19. Ibid., p. 409.
