The Law Matures | 403

Bolshevik. He was even honored by the People‘s Commissariat
of Food Supply as the best. (He claims that he got along without
reprisals against the peasantry, but I do not know whether or
not this is true. At his trial he did, however, recall that he had
organized "antispeculation" detachments.) In the twenties he
had edited the Torgovaya Gazeta (The Trade Gazette) and had
occupied other important posts. He had been arrested in 1930
when just such Mensheviks as he, "who had wormed their way
in," were to be rounded up in accordance with the GPU plans.

He had immediately been called in for questioning by Krylen—
ko, who, earlier and always, as the reader already knows, was
organizing the chaos of the preliminary inquiry into efficient
interrogation. It turned out that they knew one another very
well, for in the years between the first trials Krylenko had gone
to that very Smolensk Province to improve food—requisition work.
And here is what Krylenko now said:

«"Mikhail Petrovich, I am going to talk to you frankly: I con—
sider you a Communist! [His words encouraged Yakubovich and
raised his spirits greatly.] I have no doubt of your innocence.
But it is our Party duty, yours and mine, to carry out this trial.
[Krylenko had gotten his orders from Stalin, and Yakubovich
was all atremble for the sake of the cause, like a zealous horse
rushing into the horse collar.] I beg you to help me in every
possible way, and to assist the interrogation. And in case of un—
foreseen difficulties during the trial, at the most difficult moments,
I will ask the chairman of the court to give you the floor."

D11

And Yakubovich promised. Conscious of his duty, he
promised. Indeed, the Soviet government had never before given
him such a responsible assignment.

And thus there was not the slightest need even to touch
Yakubovich during the interrogation. But that was too subtle
for the GPU. Like everyone else, Yakubovich was handed over
to the butcher—interrogators, and they gave him the full treatment
—the freezing punishment cell, the hot box, beating his genitals.
They tortured him so intensively that Yakubovich and his fellow
defendant Abram Ginzburg opened their veins in desperation.
After they had received medical attention, they were no longer
tortured and beaten. Instead, the only thing to which they were
