364 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

driving and driving grateful descendants into Siberia!

And Krylenko burst out in a temper: "Hardened eternal ene—
mies"—that‘s who the defendants are! In that case it‘s quite clear
even without any trial what has to be done with them.

The Code was still so new that Krylenko could not even re—
member the main counterrevolutionary articles by their numbers
—but how he slashed about with those numbers! How pro—
foundly he cited and interpreted them! Just as if the blade of the
guillotine had for decades hinged and dropped only on those
articles. And especially new and important was the fact that we
did not draw the distinction between methods and means the old
Tsarist Code had drawn. Such distinctions had no influence either
on the classification of the charges or on the penalties imposed!
For us, intent and action were identical! A resolution had been
passed—we would try them for that. And whether it "was carried
out or not had no essential significance.""" Whether a man
whispered to his wife in bed that it would be a good thing to
overthrow the Soviet government or whether he engaged in
propaganda during elections or threw a bomb, it was all one and
the same! And the punishment was identical!!!

And just as a foresighted painter proceeds from his first few
brusquely drawn, angular strokes to create the whole desired
portrait, so, for us, the entire panorama of 1937, 1945, and 1949
becomes ever clearer and more visible in the sketches of 1922.

But no, one thing is missing! What‘s missing is the conduct of
the defendants. They have not yet become trained sheep. They
are still people! We have been told little, very little, but from that
little we can understand a great deal. Sometimes through care—
lessness, Krylenko cites what they said right at the trial. For
example, the defendant Berg "accused the Bolsheviks of responsi—
bility for the deaths of January 5"—shooting down those who
were demonstrating on behalf of the Constituent Assembly. And
what Liberov said was even more direct: "I admit I was guilty
of failing to work hard enough at overthrowing the Bolshevik
government in 1918."" Yevgeniya Ratner adhered to the same
line, and Berg also declared: "I consider myself guilty before the
workers‘ Russia for having been unable to fight with all my
strength against the so—called workers‘ and peasants‘ government,

30. Ibid., p. 185.
31. Ibid., p. 103.
