492 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

barrier but by a grating which leaves them open for inspection.
This grating consists of intersecting diagonal bars, like the kind
one sees in station parks. It rises the full height of the car, and
because of it there are not the usual baggage racks projecting from
the compartments over the corridor. The windows on the cor—
ridor sides are ordinary windows, but they have the same diagonal
gratings on the outside. There are no windows in the prisoners‘
compartments—only tiny, barred blinds on the level of the
second sleeping shelves. That‘s why the car has no exterior win—
dows and looks like a baggage car. The door into each compart—
ment is a sliding door:; an iron frame with bars.

From the corridor side all this is very reminiscent of a me—
nagerie: pitiful creatures resembling human beings are huddled
there in cages, the floors and bunks surrounded on all sides by
metal grilles, looking out at you pitifully, begging for something
to eat and drink. Except that in menageries they never crowd the
wild animals in so tightly.

According to the calculations of nonprisoner engineers, six
people can sit on the bottom bunks of a Stolypin compartment,
and another three can lie on the middle ones (which are joined
in one continuous bunk, except for the space cut out beside the
door for climbing up and getting down), and two more can lie
on the baggage shelves above. Now if, in addition to these eleven,
eleven more are pushed into the compartment (the last of whom
are shoved out of the way of the door by the jailers‘ boots as they
shut it), then this will constitute a normal complement for a
Stolypin prisoners‘ compartment. Two huddle, half—sitting, on
each of the upper baggage shelves; another five lie on the joined
middle level (and they are the lucky ones—these places are won
in battle, and if there are any prisoners present from the under—
world companionship of thieves—the blatnye—then it is they
who are lying there); and this leaves thirteen down below: five
sit on each of the bunks and three are in the aisle between their
legs. Somewhere, mixed up with the people, on the people and
under the people, are their belongings. And that is how they sit,
their crossed legs wedged beneath them, day after day.

No, it isn‘t done especially to torture people. A sentenced
prisoner is a laboring soldier of socialism, so why should he be
tortured? They need him for construction work. But, after all,
