378 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

fense, which agreed with all the prosecutor‘s proposals. The
principal defense lawyer called the prosecutor‘s summation his—
toric and described his own as narrow, admitting that in making
it he had gone against the dictates of his heart, for "a Soviet de—
fense lawyer is first of all a Soviet citizen" and "like all workers,
he, too, is outraged" at the crimes of the defendants.‘ During
the trial the defense asked shy and tentative questions and then
instantly backed away from them if Vyshinsky interrupted. The
lawyers actually defended only two harmless textile officials and
did not challenge the formal charges nor the description of the
defendants‘ actions, but asked only whether the defendants might
avoid execution. Is it more useful, Comrade Judges, "to have
their corpses or their labor?"

. . . How foul—smelling were the crimes of these bourgeois engi—
neers? Here is what they consisted of. They planned to reduce the
tempo of development, as, for instance, to an over—all annual increase
in production of only 20 to 22 percent, whereas the workers were
prepared to increase it by 40 to 50 percent. They slowed down the
rate of mining local fuels. They were too slow in developing the
Kuznetsk Basin. They exploited theoretical and economic arguments
—such as whether to supply the Donets Basin with electricity from
the Dnieper power station or whether to build a supertrunk—line
between Moscow and the Donbas—in order to delay the solutions of
important problems. (The work stops while engineers argue!) They
postponed considering new engineering projects (i.e., they did not
authorize them immediately). In lectures on the resistance of mate—
rials, they took an anti—Soviet line. They installed worn—out equipment.
They tied up capital funds, for example, by using them for costly
and lengthy construction projects. They carried out unnecessary (!)
repairs. They misused metals (some grades of iron were wanting).
They created an imbalance between the departments of a plant and
between the supply of raw materials and the capacity for processing
them industrially. (This was particularly notable in the textile industry,
where they built one or two factories more than they needed to process
the cotton harvest.) Then they leaped from minimal to maximal
plans. And obvious wrecking began through the accelerated develop—
ment of that same unfortunate textile industry. Most importantly,
they planned sabotage in the field of electric power—even though
none was ever carried out. Thus wrecking did not take the form of

9. Ibid., p. 488.
