64 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

the fact that people were sentenced not only for actual

espionage but also for:

PSh—Suspicion of Espionage—or NSh—Unproven Espionage
—for which they gave the whole works.

And even SVPSh—Contacts Leading to (!) Suspicion of
Espionage.

In other words, let us say that an acquaintance of an ac—
quaintance of your wife had a dress made by the same seam—
stress (who was, of course, an NKVD agent) used by the
wife of a foreign diplomat.

These 58—6 PSh‘s and SVPSh‘s were sticky sections. They re—
quired the strict confinement and incessant supervision of those
convicted (for, after all, an intelligence service might reach
out its tentacles to its protégé even in a camp); also, such
prisoners could be moved only under convoy—armed escort. In
general, all the lettered articles—which were, in fact, not articles
of the Code at all but frightening combinations of capital letters
(and we shall encounter more of them in this chapter)—always
contained a touch of the enigmatic, always remained incompre—
hensible, and it wasn‘t at all clear whether they were offshoots
of Article 58 or independent and extremely dangerous. In many
camps prisoners convicted under the provisions of these lettered
articles were subjected to restrictions even more stringent than
those of the ordinary 58‘s.

Section 7 applied to subversion of industry, transport, trade,
and the circulation of money.

In the thirties, extensive use was made of this section to
catch masses of people—under the simplified and widely under—
stood catchword wrecking. In reality, everything enumerated
under Section 7 was very obviously and plainly being sub—
verted daily. So didn‘t someone have to be guilty of it all?
For centuries the people had built and created, always honor—
ably, always honestly, even for serf—owners and nobles. Yet
no one, from the days of Ryurik on, had ever heard of wreck—
ing. But now, when for the first time all the wealth had come
to belong to the people, hundreds of thousands of the best
sons of the people inexplicably rushed off to wreck. (Section 7
did not provide for wrecking in agriculture, but since it was
impossible otherwise to explain rationally how and why the
fields were choked with weeds, why harvests were falling off,
