336 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

Although in December, 1921, the Ninth Congress of the
Soviets decreed that the authority of the Cheka be narrowed*
. and, in consequence, its authority was indeed narrowed and it
was renamed the GPU, as early as October, 1922, the powers
of the GPU were broadened again, and in December Dzerzhinsky
told a Pravda correspondent: "Now we need to keep watch
with particular vigilance over anti—Soviet currents and group—
ings. The GPU has reduced its apparatus but strengthened it in
terms of quality."*

And, at the beginning of 1922, we must not bypass:

G. The Case of the Suicide of Engineer Oldenborger
(Tried before the Verkhtrib—the Supreme Tribwnal
—in February, 1922)

This case is forgotten, insignificant, and totally atypical. It
was atypical because its entire scale was that of a single life that
had already ended. And if that life hadn‘t ended, it would have
been that very engineer, yes, and ten more with him, forming a
Center, who would have sat before the Verkhtrib; in that event
the case would have been altogether typical. But as it was, an
outstanding Party comrade, Sedelnikov, sat on the defendants‘
bench and, with him, two members of the RKI—the Workers‘
. and Peasants‘ Inspection—and two trade—union officials.

But, like Chekhov‘s far—off broken harp—string, there was
something plaintive in this trial; it was, in its own way, an early
predecessor of the Shakhty and Promparty trials.

V. V. Oldenborger had worked for thirty years in the Moscow
water—supply system and had evidently become its chief engineer
back at the beginning of the century. Even though the Silver
Age of art, four State Dumas, three wars, and three revolutions
had come and gone, all Moscow drank Oldenborger‘s water: The
Acmeists and the Futurists, the reactionaries and the revolution—
aries, the military cadets and the Red Guards, the Council of
People‘s Commissars, the Cheka, and the Workers‘ and Peasants‘
Inspection—all had drunk Oldenborger‘s pure cold water. He
had never married and he had no children. His whole life had
consisted of that one water—supply system. In 1905 he refused

3. Sobraniye Uzakonenii RSFSR (Collection of Decrees of the R.S.F.S.R.),

1922, No. 4, p. 42.
4. Pravda, December 17, 1922.
