The Supreme Measure | 449

in the cell, but every one of them, after all, had sent a petition to
Kalinin and every one expected a commutation, and therefore:
"You today, me tomorrow." They moved away and looked on
indifferently while the condemned man was tied up, while he
cried out for help, while they shoved a child‘s rubber ball into
his mouth. (Now, looking at that child‘s ball, could one really
guess all its possible uses? What a good example for a lecturer
on the dialectical method!)

Does hope lend strength or does it weaken a man? If the con—
demned men in every cell had ganged up on the executioners
as they came in and choked them, wouldn‘t this have ended the
executions sooner than appeals to the All—Russian Central
Executive Committee? When one is already on the edge of the
grave, why not resist?

But wasn‘t everything foredoomed anyway, from the moment
of arrest? Yet all the arrested crawled along the path of hope
on their knees, as if their legs had been amputated.

Vasily Grigoryevich Vlasov remembers that night after he‘d
been sentenced when he was being taken through dark Kady,
and four pistols were brandished on four sides of him. His main
thought was: "What if they shoot right now, as a provocation,
claiming I was trying to escape?" Obviously he didn‘t yet believe
in his sentence. He still hoped to live.

They confined him in the police room. He was allowed to lie
down on the desk to sleep, and two or three policemen kept
continuous guard by the light of a kerosene lamp. They talked
among themselves: "I kept listening and listening for four days,
and I never could understand what they were being condemned
for." "It‘s not for us to understand."

Vlasov lived in this room for five days: they were waiting for
an official confirmation of the verdict in order to execute them
right there in Kady; it was not easy to convoy the condemned
men to some other point. Someone sent a telegram for Vlasov
requesting pardon: "I do not admit my guilt, and I request that
my life be spared." There was no reply. During these days
Vlasov‘s hands shook so that he could not lift his spoon to his
