The Ships of the Archipelago | 497

tion), while the private first class has to push open and then shut
the door to the compartment, first to admit the returning prisoner,
and then to allow the next one out. The statutes permit letting
out only one at a time, so that they don‘t try to escape and so that
they can‘t start a rebellion. Therefore, the way it works out is
that the one prisoner who has been let out to go to the toilet is
holding up 30 others in his own compartment and 120 in the
whole car, not to mention the convoy detail! And so the command
resounds: "Come on there, come on! Get a move on, get a move
on!" The private first class and the soldiers keep hurrying him all
the way there and back and he hurries so fast that he stumbles,
and it‘s as though they think he is going to steal that shithole
from the state. (In 1949, traveling in a Stolypin car between
Moscow and Kuibyshev, the one—legged German Schultz, having
understood the Russian hurry—up by this time, jumped to the
toilet and back on his one leg while the convoy kept laughing and
ordering him to go faster. During one such trip, one of the convoy
guards pushed him when he reached the platform at the end of the
corridor, and Schultz fell down on the floor in front of the toilet.
The convoy guard went into a rage and began to beat him,
while Schultz, who couldn‘t get up because of the blows raining
down on him, crawled and crept into the dirty toilet. The rest
of the convoy roared with laughter.)*

So that the prisoner shouldn‘t attempt to escape during the
moment he was in the toilet, and also for a faster turnaround,
the door to the toilet was not closed, and the convoy guard, watch—
ing the process from the platform of the car, could encourage it:
"Come on, come on now! That‘s plenty, that‘s enough for you!"
Sometimes the orders came before you even started: "All right,
number one only!" And that meant that from the platform they‘d
prevent your doing anything else. And then, of course, you
couldn‘t wash your hands. There was never enough water in the
tank there, and there wasn‘t enough time either. If the prisoner
even so much as touched the plunger of the washstand, the con—
voy guard would roar: "Don‘t you touch that, move along." (And
if someone happened to have soap or a towel among his belong—
ings, he wouldn‘t dare take it out anyway, simply out of shame:

4. This, it seems, is what is meant by the phrase "Stalin‘s cult of person—
ality"?
