454 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

War, had studied horse breeding, and then served in the pro—
vincial local self—government council; by the thirties he was at—
tached to the Ivanovo Provincial Agricultural Department as
"inspector of the horse herd of the Red Army." In other words, he
was supposed to see to it that the best horses went to the army. He
was arrested and sentenced to be shot for wrecking—for recom—
mending that stallions be gelded before the age of three, by which
means he allegedly "subverted the fighting capacity of the Red
Army." Khomenko appealed the verdict. Fifty—five days later the
block supervisor came around and pointed out to him that he had
addressed his appeal to the wrong appeals jurisdiction. Right then
and there, propping the paper against the wall and using the
block supervisor‘s pencil, Khomenko crossed out one jurisdiction
and substituted another, as if it were a request for a pack of
cigarettes. Thus clumsily corrected, the appeal made the rounds
for another sixty days, so Khomenko had been awaiting death for
four months. (As for waiting a year or two, after all, we spend
year after year waiting for the angel of death! Isn‘t our whole
world just a death cell?) And one day complete rehabilitation for
Khomenko arrived. (In the interval since his sentence, Voroshilov
had given orders that gelding should be done before age three.)
Die one minute and dance the next!

Many sentences were commuted, and many prisoners had high
hopes. But Vlasov, comparing his case with those of the others,
and keeping in mind his conduct at the trial as the principal
factor, felt that things were likely to go badly for him. They had
to shoot someone. They probably had to shoot at least half of
those condemned to death. So he came to believe they would
shoot him. And he wanted just one thing—not to bow his head
when it happened. That recklessness which was one of his charac—
teristics returned to him and increased within him, and he was all
set to be bold and brazen to the very end.

And an opportunity came his way. Making the rounds of the
prison for some reason—most likely just to give himself a thrill
—the Chief of the Investigation Department of Ivanovo State
Security, Chinguli, ordered the door of their cell opened and
stood on the threshold. He spoke to someone and asked: "Who is
here from the Kady case?"

He was dressed in a short—sleeved silk shirt, which had just
begun to appear in Russia and therefore still seemed effeminate.
