400 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

ducers were sure of themselves. For after all, the subject wasn‘t
technical but was Party material, ordinary stuff. So they brought
fourteen defendants onto the stage.

And it all went off not just smoothly but brilliantly.

I was twelve at the time. For three years I had been attentively
reading everything about politics on the enormous pages of
Izvestiya. 1 read the stenographic records of these two trials line
by line. In the Promparty case, I had already felt, in my boyish
heart, superfluity, falsehood, fabrication, but at least there were
spectacular stage sets—universal intervention, the paralysis of
all industry, the distribution of ministerial portfolios! In the
trial of the Mensheviks, all the same stage sets were brought out,
but they were more pallid. And the actors spoke their lines with—
out enthusiasm. And the whole performance was a yawning bore,
an inept, tired repetition. (Could it be that Stalin felt this, too,
through his rhinoceros hide? How else can one explain his call—
ing off the case of the Working Peasants Party after it had
already been prepared, or why there were no more trials for
several years?)

It would be boring to base our interpretations once again on
the stenographic record. In any case, I have fresher evidence
from one of the principal defendants in this case—Mikhail
Petrovich Yakubovich. At the present moment, his petition for
rehabilitation, exposing all the dirty work which went on, has
filtered through to samizdat, our savior, and people are reading
it just as it happened."" His story offers material proof and ex—
planation of the whole chain of Moscow trials of the thirties.

How was the nonexistent "Union Bureau" created? The GPU
had been given an assignment: they had been told to prove that
the Mensheviks had adroitly wormed their way into—and seized
—many important government jobs for counterrevolutionary
purposes. The genuine situation did not jibe with this plan. There
were no real Mensheviks in important posts. But then there were
no real Mensheviks on trial either. (True, they say V. K. Ikov

32. He was refused rehabilitation. After all, the case in which he was tried
had entered the golden tables of our history. After all, one cannot take back
even one stone, because the entire building might collapse. Thus it is that
M.P.Y. still has his conviction on his record. However, for his consolation,
he has been granted a personal pension for his revolutionary activity! What
monstrosities exist in our country.
