The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 39

grad students were sentenced to three years in political detention
for reading the Sotsialistichesky Vestnik—the organ of the Men—
sheviks abroad—and for studying Plekhanov. (In his youth Ple—
khanov himself had gotten off far more lightly for speaking out
against the government in front of Kazan Cathedral.) In 1925
they had already begun to arrest the first (young) Trotskyites.
(Two naive Red Army men, remembering the Russian tradition,
began to collect funds for the arrested Trotskyites—and they, too,
were put in political detention.)

And, of course, it is obvious that the exploiting classes were not
spared. Throughout the twenties the hunt continued for former
officers who had managed to survive: "Whites" (those who had
not already earned execution during the Civil War); "White—
Reds," who had fought on both sides; and "Tsarist Reds," Tsarist
officers who had gone over to the Red Army but had not served in
it for the whole period or who had gaps in their army service
records and no documents to account for them. They were truly
put through the mill because instead of being sentenced immedi—
ately they, too, were put through the solitaire game: endless ver—
ifications, limitations on the kind of work they could do and on
where they could live; they were taken into custody, released,
taken into custody again. And only gradually did they proceed
to the camps, from which they did not return.

However, sending these officers to the Archipelago did not end
the problem but only set it in motion. After all, their mothers,
wives, and children were still at liberty. With the help of unerring
social analysis it was easy to see what kind of mood they were in
after the heads of their households had been arrested. And thus
they simply compelled their own arrest too! And one more wave
was set rolling.

In the twenties there was an amnesty for Cossacks who had
taken part in the Civil War. Many of them returned from the
island of Lemnos to the Kuban, where they were given land. All
of them were subsequently arrested.

And, of course, all former state officials had gone into hiding
and were likewise liable to be hunted down. They had hidden well
and disguised themselves cleverly, making use of the fact that
there was as yet no internal passport system nor any unified system
of work—books in the Republic—and they managed to creep into
