The Law Matures | 407

who cannot answer. It is a human trait. And somehow the argu—
ments to prove we are right appear out of nowhere.

Krylenko said in his summation for the prosecution that
Yakubovich was a fanatic advocate of counterrevolutionary ideas
and demanded therefore that he be shot.

And Yakubovich that day felt a tear of gratitude roll down
his cheek, and he feels it still to this day, after having dragged
his way through many camps and detention prisons. Even today
he is grateful to Krylenko for not humiliating him, for not in—
sulting him, for not ridiculing him as a defendant, and for call—
ing him correctly a fanatic advocate (even of an idea contrary
to his real one) and for demanding simple, noble execution for
him, that would put an end to all his sufferings! In his final
statement, Yakubovich agreed with Krylenko himself: "The
crimes to which I have confessed [he endowed with great sig—
nificance his success in hitting on the expression ‘to which I have
confessed —anyone who understood would realize that he meant
‘not those which I committed‘] deserve the highest measure of
punishment—and I do not ask any forgiveness! I do not ask that
my life be spared!" (Beside him on the defendants‘ bench, Gro—
man got excited! "You are insane! You have to consider your
comrades. You don‘t have the right!")

Now wasn‘t he a find for the prosecutor?

And can one still say the trials of 1936 to 1938 are un—
explained?

Was it not through this trial that Stalin came to understand
and believe that he could readily round up all his loud—mouth
enemies and get them organized for just such a performance as
this?

And may my compassionate reader now have mercy on me!
Until now my pen sped on untrembling, my heart didn‘t skip a
beat, and we slipped along unconcerned, because for these fifteen
years we have been firmly protected either by legal revolution—
ality or else by revolutionary legality. But from now on things
will be painful: as the reader will recollect, as we have had ex—
plained to us dozens of times, beginning with Khrushchev, "from
