The Supreme Measure | 453

the farewells were particularly hard. During the night six guards
came tramping in for him, making a big rush of it, while he,
gentle, well mannered, kept turning around, twisting his cap in
his hands, putting off the moment of his leavetaking—from the
last people on earth for him. And when he said his final "Fare—
well," you could hardly hear his voice.

At the very first moment, when the victim has been pointed
out, the rest are relieved (It‘s not me!). But right after he has
been taken away, the ones left behind are in a state that is hardly
any easier to bear than his. All the next day, those left behind
are destined to silence and they won‘t want to eat.

However, Geraska, the young fellow who broke up the build—
ing of the village soviet, ate well and slept a lot, getting used to
things, even here, with typical peasant facility. He somehow
couldn‘t believe they would shoot him. (And they didn‘t. They
commuted his sentence to a tenner.)

Several of the inmates turned gray in three or four days before
their cellmates‘ eyes.

When people wait so long for execution, their hair grows, and
orders are given for the whole cell to get haircuts, for the whole
cell to get baths. Prison existence goes on, without regard to
sentences.

Some individuals lost the ability to speak intelligibly and to
understand. But they were left there to await their fate anyway.
Anyone who went insane in the death cell was executed insane.

Many sentences were commuted. It was right then, in that fall
of 1937, that fifteen— and twenty—year terms were introduced for
the first time since the Revolution, and in many cases they
replaced the executioners‘ bullets. There were also commuta—
tions to ten—year sentences. And even to five years. In the country
of miracles even such miracles as this were possible: yesterday
he deserved to be executed, and this morning he gets a juvenile
sentence; he is a minor criminal, and in camp he may even be
able to move around without convoy.

V. N. Khomenko, a sixty—year—old Cossack captain from the
Kuban, was also imprisoned in their cell. He was the "soul of the
cell," if a death cell can be said to have a soul: he cracked jokes;
he smiled to himself; he didn‘t act as if things were bad. He had
become unfit for military service way back after the Japanese
