The Interrogation | 103

Understanding that their superiors were taking precautions for
self—protection, some of the rank—and—file interrogators—not,
however, those who drank like maniacs—tried to start off with
milder methods, and even when they intensified them, they tried
to avoid those that left obvious marks: an eye gouged out, an
ear torn off, a backbone broken, even bruises all over the body.

That is why in 1937 we observe no general consistency of
methods—except for enforced sleeplessness—in the administra—
tions of the various provinces, or for that matter among the differ—
ent interrogators of a single administration.‘®

What they did have in common, however, was that they gave
precedence to the so—called light methods (we will see what they
were immediately). This way was sure. Indeed, the actual bound—
aries of human equilibrium are very narrow, and it is not really
necessary to use a rack or hot coals to drive the average human
being out of his mind.

Let us try to list some of the simplest methods which break
the will and the character of the prisoner without leaving marks
on his body.

Let us begin with psychological methods. These methods have
enormous and even annihilating impact on rabbits who have never
been prepared for prison suffering. And it isn‘t easy even for a
person who holds strong convictions.

1. First of all: night. Why is it that all the main work of
breaking down human souls went on at night? Why, from their
very earliest years, did the Organs select the night? Because at
night, the prisoner torn from sleep, even though he has not yet
been tortured by sleeplessness, lacks his normal daytime equani—
mity and common sense. He is more vulnerable.

2. Persuasion in a sincere tone is the very simplest method.
Why play at cat and mouse, so to speak? After all, having spent
some time among others undergoing interrogation, the prisoner
has come to see what the situation is. And so the interrogator
says to him in a lazily friendly way: "Look, you‘re going to get
a prison term whatever happens. But if you resist, you‘ll crocak
right here in prison, you‘ll lose your health. But if you go to
camp, you‘ll have fresh air and sunlight. . . . So why not sign
right now?" Very logical. And those who agree and sign are

10. It is common talk that Rostov—on—the—Don and Krasnodar were particu—
larly distinguished for the cruelty of their tortures, but this has not been proved.
