234 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

_ However, it took only one interrogation for the Big Lubyanka
to quiet down again. It turned out to be not so dangerous. Ten
arrests in the garage of the auto depot and four in the garage of
the People‘s Commissariat of Petroleum. The interrogation was
turned over to a lieutenant colonel, who had a good laugh as he
went through the proclamation:

"You write here, Your Majesty: ‘In the first spring I will
instruct my Minister of Agnculture to dissolve the collective
farms.‘ But how are you going to divide up the tools and live—
. stock? You haven‘t got it worked out yet. And then you also

write: ‘I am going to increase housing construction and house

each person next to the place he works, and I am going to raise
‘all the workers‘ wages.‘ And where are you going to find the
money, Your Majesty? Are you going to have to run the money
off on printing presses? You are going to abolish the state loans.

And then, too: ‘I am going to wipe the Kremlin from the face

of the earth.‘ But where are you going to put your own govern—

ment? What about the building of the Big Lubyanka? Would you

like to take a tour of inspection and look it over?"

___ Many of the younger interrogators also stopped by to make
fun of the Emperor of All Russia. They saw nothing except

comedy in all this.

And it was not always easy for us in the cell to keep a straight
face. "We hope you aren‘t going to forget us here in Cell
No. 53," said Z———v, winking at the rest of us.

Everyone laughed at him.

Viktor Alekseyevich, with his white eyebrows and innocent
simplicity and his callused hands, would treat us when he received
boiled potatoes from his unfortunate mother, Pelageya, without
ever dividing them into “yours” and mine": "Come on, com—
rades, eat up, eat up!" |

He used to smile shyly. He understood perfectly well how
uncontemporary and funny all this was—to be the Emperor of
All Russia. But what could he do if God‘s choice had fallen
on him?

They soon removed him from our cell."

24. When they introduced me to Khrushchev in 1962, I wanted to say to
him: "Nikita Sergeyevich! You and I have an acquaintance in common." But
I told him something else, more urgent, on behalf of former prisoners.
