52 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

what is secret, how many others followed in their footsteps? How
many were secretly arrested?

Then came the time—slowly, it is true, but surely—when it
was the turn of the members of the ruling Party to do time in
prison! At first—from 1927 to 1929—it was a question of the
"workers‘ opposition," in other words, the Trotskyites, who had
chosen themselves such an unsuccessful leader. They numbered,
hundreds at the start; soon there would be thousands. But it‘s
the first step that‘s the hardest! Just as these Trotskyites had
observed with approval the arrest of members of other parties, so
the rest of the Party now watched approvingly as the Trotskyites
were arrested. But everyone would have his turn. The nonexistent
"rightist opposition" would come later, and, limb by limb, be—
ginning with its own tail, the ravenous maw would devour itself

. . right up to its head.

From 1928 on, it was time to call to a reckoning those late
stragglers after the bourgeoisie—the NEPmen. The usual practice
was to impose on them ever—increasing and finally totally intoler—
able taxes. At a certain point they could no longer pay; they were
immediately arrested for bankruptcy, and their property was con—
fiscated. (Small tradesmen such as barbers, tailors, even those
who repaired primus stoves, were only deprived of their licenses
to ply their trade.)

There was an economic purpose to the development of the
NEPmen wave. The state needed property and gold, and there
was as yet no Kolyma. The famous gold fever began at the end of
1929, only the fever gripped not those looking for gold but those
from whom it was being shaken loose. The particular feature of
this new, "gold" wave was that the GPU was not actually accus—
ing these rabbits of anything, and was perfectly willing not to
send them off to Gulag country, but wished only to take away
their gold by main force. So the prisons were packed, the inter—
rogators were worn to a frazzle, but the transit prisons, prisoner
transports, and camps received only relatively minor reinforce—
ments.

Who was arrested in the "gold" wave? All those who, at one
time or another, fifteen years before, had had a private "business,"
had been involved in retail trade, had earned wages at a craft,
and could have, according to the GPU‘s deductions, hoarded gold.
