First Cell, First Love | 191

of course, there were no muzzles on the prison windows, and
from the cells of the Belaya Tserkov Prison in which Fastenko
was being held the prisoners could easily observe the prison
courtyard and the street, and all arrivals and departures, and
they could shout back and forth as they pleased to ordinary
citizens outside. During the day of October 17, these outsiders,
having learned of the amnesty by telegraph, announced the news
to the prisoners. In their happiness the political prisoners went
wild with joy. They smashed windowpanes, broke down doors,
and demanded that the prison warden release them immediately.
And were any of them kicked right in the snout with jackboots?
Or put in punishment cells? Or was anyone deprived of library
and commissary privileges? Of course not! In his distress, the
warden ran from cell to cell and implored them: "Gentlemen!
I beg of you, please be reasonable! I don‘t have the authority to
release you on the basis of a telegraphed report. I must have
direct orders from my superiors in Kiev. Please, I beg of you.
You will have to spend the night here." And in actual fact they
were most barbarously kept there for one more day.®

On getting back their freedom, Fastenko and his comrades
immediately rushed to join the revolution. In 1906 he was
sentenced to eight years at hard labor, which meant four years
in irons and four in exile. He served the first four years in the
Sevastopol Central Prison, where, incidentally, during his stay,
a mass escape was organized from outside by a coalition of
revolutionary parties: the SR‘s, the Anarchists, and the Social
Democrats. A bomb blew a hole in the prison wall big enough
for a horse and rider to go through, and two dozen prisoners—
not everyone who wanted to escape, but those who had been
chosen ahead of time by their parties and, right inside the prison,
had been equipped with pistols by the jailers—fled through the
hole and escaped. All but one: Anatoly Fastenko was selected
by the Russian Social Democratic Party not to escape but to
cause a disturbance in order to distract the attention of the
guards.

On the other hand, when he reached exile in the Yenisei area,

9. After Stalin‘s amnesty, as I will recount later, those amnestied were held
in prison for another two or three months and were forced to slog away just
as before. And no one considered this illegal.
