Arrest | 9

obscure, ordinary mortal, scared to death by epidemic arrests all
around him and already depressed for a week by sinister glances
from his chief, is suddenly summoned to the local Party com—
mittee, where he is beamingly presented with a vacation ticket to
a Sochi sanatorium. The rabbit is overwhelmed and immediately
concludes that his fears were groundless. After expressing his
gratitude, he hurries home, triumphant, to pack his suitcase. It
is only two hours till train time, and he scolds his wife for being
too slow. He arrives at the station with time to spare. And there
in the waiting room or at the bar he is hailed by an extraordinar—
ily pleasant young man: "Don‘t you remember me, Pyotr
Ivanich?" Pyotr Ivanich has difficulty remembering: "Well, not

exactly, you see, although . . ." The young man, however, is over—
flowing with friendly concern: "Come now, how can that be? I‘ll
have to remind you. . . ." And he bows respectfully to Pyotr

Ivanich‘s wife: "You must forgive us. I‘ll keep him only one
minute." The wife accedes, and trustingly the husband lets him—
self be led away by the arm—forever or for ten years!

The station is thronged—and no one notices anything. . . .
Oh, you citizens who love to travel! Do not forget that in every
station there are a GPU Branch and several prison cells.

This importunity of alleged acquaintances is so abrupt that
only a person who has not had the wolfish preparation of camp
life is likely to pull back from it. Do not suppose, for example,
that if you are an employee of the American Embassy by the
name of Alexander D. you cannot be arrested in broad daylight
on Gorky Street, right by the Central Telegraph Office. Your un—
familiar friend dashes through the press of the crowd, and opens
his plundering arms to embrace you: "Saaasha!" He simply
shouts at you, with no effort to be inconspicuous. "Hey, pal! Long
time no see! Come on over, let‘s get out of the way." At that
moment a Pobeda sedan draws up to the curb. . . . And several
days later TASS will issue an angry statement to all the papers
alleging that informed circles of the Soviet government have no
information on the disappearance of Alexander D. But what‘s so
unusual about that? Our boys have carried out such arrests in
Brussels—which was where Zhora Blednov was seized—not just
in Moscow.

One has to give the Organs their due: in an age when public
