478 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

The deficiency was provided for by the complementary existence
of the TON‘s—the Special Purpose Prisons—and prisons for
long—termers in general.

Not everyone swallowed up by the Great Machine was allowed
to mingle with the natives of the Archipelago. Well—known
foreigners, individuals who were too famous or who were being
held secretly, purged gaybisty, could not by any means be seen
openly in camps; their hauling a barrow did not compensate for
the disclosure and the consequent moral—political" damage. In
the same way, the socialists, who were engaged in a continuous
struggle for their prison rights, could not conceivably be permitted
to mingle with the masses but had to be kept separately and, in
fact, suffocated separately—in view of their special privileges
and rights. Much later on, in the fifties, as we shall learn later
in this work, the Special Purpose Prisons were also needed to
isolate camp rebels. And in the last years of his life, disappointed
in the possibilities of "reforming" thieves, Stalin gave orders that
various ringleaders of the thieves should also get tyurzak rather
than camp. And then, to be sure, it was necessary for the state
to support free of charge in prison those prisoners who because
of their feebleness would have immediately died off in camp and
would thus have shirked their duty to serve out their terms. And
others who couldn‘t possibly be used in camp work—like the
blind Kopeikin, a man of seventy who used to sit all day long
in the market in Yuryevets on the Volga. His songs and facetious
comments won him ten years for KRD—Counter—Revolutionary
Activity—but in his case they had to substitute prison for camp.

The inventory of old jails, inherited from the Romanov dynasty,
was, of necessity, looked after, remodeled, strengthened, and
perfected. Certain central prisons, like the one in Yaroslavl, were
so well and suitably appointed (doors plated with iron; table,
stool, and cot permanently anchored in each cell) that the only
thing required to bring them up to date was the installation of
"muzzles" on the windows and the fencing in of the courtyards
where the prisoners walked in order to reduce them to the size
of a cell (by 1937 all the trees on prison grounds had been cut
down, all vegetable gardens plowed under, and all grassy areas
paved with asphalt). Others, like the one in Suzdal, required new

15. This term actually exists! And it has a sky—blue swampy coloration!
