384 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

take the Ukraine right bank as her share. England wouldn‘t
fight either, of course, but, in order to raise a scare, promised to
send her fleet into the Black Sea and into the Baltic—in return,
she would get Caucasian oil. The actual warriors would, for the
most part, be the following: 100,000 émigrés (true, they had
long since scattered to the four winds, but it would take only
a whistle to gather them all together again immediately); Poland
—for which she would get half the Ukraine; Rumania (whose
brilliant successes in World War I were famous—she was a
formidable enemy). And then there were Latvia and Estonia.
(These two small countries would willingly drop all the concerns
of their young governments and rush forth en masse to do battle.)
And the most frightening thing of all was the direction of the
main blow. How‘s that? Was it already known? Yes! It would
begin from Bessarabia, and from there, keeping to the right bank
of the Dnieper, it would move straight on Moscow." And at
that fateful moment, would not all our railroads certainly be
blown up? No, not at all. Bottlenecks would be created! And the
Promparty would also yank out the fuses in electric power sta—
tions, and the entire Soviet Union would be plunged into dark—
ness, and all our machinery would come to a halt, including the
textile machinery! And sabotage would be carried out. (Atten—
tion, defendants! You must not name your methods of sabotage,
nor the factories which were your objectives, nor the geographic
sites involved, until the closed session. And you must not name
names, whether foreign or our own!) Combine all this with the
fatal blow which will have been dealt the textile industry by that
time! Add the fact that the saboteurs will have constructed two
or three textile factories in Byelorussia which will serve as a
base of operations for the interventionists.‘* With the textile fac—
tories already in their hands, the interventionists would march
implacably on Moscow. But here was the cleverest part of the
whole plot: though they didn‘t succeed in doing so, they had
wanted to drain the Kuban marshes and the Polesye swamps, and
the swamp near Lake IImen (Vyshinsky had forbidden them to
name the exact places, but one of the witnesses blurted them

17. Who drew that arrow for Krylenko on a cigarette pack—was it not
drawn by the same hand that thought up our entire defense strategy in 19417
18. Protsess Prompartii, p. 356. This was not intended as a joke.
