The Ships of the Archipelago | 531

Black Maria with benches. Everyone sat down, and suddenly
they pushed in one more—a woman, alone. She sat down beside
the rear door, fearfully at first. After all, she was totally defense—
less against fourteen men in a dark cell. But it became clear after
a few words that all those present were comrades. Fifty—eights.

She gave us her name—Repina, a colonel‘s wife, and she had
been arrested right after he had. And suddenly a silent military
man, so young and thin that it seemed he had to be a lieutenant,
said to her: "Tell me, weren‘t you arrested with Antonina I.?"
"What? Are you her husband? Oleg?" "Yes!" "Lieutenant
Colonel I.? From the Frunze Academy?" "Yes!"

What a yes that was! It emerged from a trembling throat, and
in it there was more fear of finding out something bad than
there was happiness. He sat down next to her. Twilight shafts
of summer daylight, diffused through two microscopic gratings
in the two rear doors, flickered around the interior as the van
moved along and across the faces of the woman and the lieutenant
colonel. "She and I were imprisoned in the same cell for four
months while she was undergoing interrogation." "Where is she
now?" "All that time she lived only for you! Her fears weren‘t
for herself but were all for you. First that they shouldn‘t arrest
you. And then later that you should get a lighter sentence." "But
what has happened to her now?" "She blamed herself for your
arrest. Things were so hard for her!" "Where is she now?" "Just
don‘t be frightened"—and Repina put her hands on his chest as
if he were her own kin. "She simply couldn‘t endure the strain.
They took her away from us. She, you know, became—well, a
little confused. You understand?"

And that tiny storm boxed in sheets of steel rolled along so
peacefully in the six—lane automobile traffic, stopped at traffic
lights, and signaled for a turn.

I had met Oleg I. in the Butyrki just a few moments before—
and here is how it happened. They had herded us into the station
"box" and had brought us our things from the storage room.
They called him and me to the door at the same moment.
Through the opened door into the corridor we could see a woman
jailer rifling the contents of his suitcase, and she flung out of it
and onto the floor a golden shoulder board with the stars of a
lieutenant colonel that had survived until then all by itself, heaven
