Translator‘s Notes | 619

person "polutsvetnoi"—"half—colored" or "mulatto"—is a non—
thief who has begun to take up the ways of the thieves.

By and large, to the extent that these and other terms appear
in their original form in this translation they are clearly enough
explained. But wherever the word "thief" appears it means one
of the "blatnye."

The language of the Russian thieves is used in this work to
refer to much more than themselves.

Thus a nonthief in thief language is a "frayer." By virtue of
being a nonthief he is also naturally "a mark," "a cull," "a
pigeon," "an innocent," "a sucker." In this translation, "frayer"
has been rendered throughout as "sucker."

Some other terms that relate to the world of Gulag require
special explanation:

At times in the text "ugolovniki" (which we have translated
as "habitual criminals") and "bytoviki" (which we have trans—
lated as "nonpolitical offenders") have been grouped together in
contrast to the political prisoners.

A "bytovik" is any prisoner who is not a political nor one of
the Russian thieves—and the "bytoviki" or "nonpolitical offend—
ers" make up the enormous main mass of the prisoners. The
distinction here is just as much psychological as legal, and in
English there is nothing that exactly translates this Russian term.

The "ugolovniki" or "habitual criminals" are obviously pro—
fessionals and therefore approximately the same as the thieves.

Chapter 3 in Part I is entitled in Russian "Slédstviye." The
correct, legally formal rendering of this word into English would
be "investigation." The official conducting the "investigation" is
a "slédovatel" or, again in the formal rendering, "investigator."
I have, however, chosen, deliberately and after consideration and
consultation, generally to translate these Russian terms respec—
tively as "interrogation" and "interrogator." The text of the book
makes the reason amply clear. There was in the period and the
cases described here no content of "investigation" in this process,
nor was there anyone who could legitimately be called an ‘"in—
vestigator." There was interrogation and there were interrogators.

In camps prisoners were divided into those who went out on
general—assignment work every day—and therefore died off—
and those who got "cushy" jobs within the camp compound at

53 66
