536 ] THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

"If you‘re talking about the Vladivostok Transit Prison, then
in February, 1937, there weren‘t more than forty thousand there."

"People were stuck there for several months at a time. The
bedbugs infested the board bunks like locusts. Half a mug of
water a day; there wasn‘t any more!—no one to haul it. There
was one whole compound of Koreans, and they all died from
dysentery, every last one of them. They took a hundred corpses
out of our own compound every morning. They were building
a morgue, so they hitched the zeks to the carts and hauled the
stone that way. Today you do the hauling, and tomorrow they
haul you there yourself. And in autumn the typhus arrived. And
we did the same thing: we didn‘t hand over the corpses till they
stank—and took the extra rations. No medication whatever,. We
crawled to the fence and begged: ‘Give us medicine.‘ And the
guards fired a volley from the watchtowers. Then they as—
sembled those with typhus in a separate barracks. Some didn‘t
make it there, and only a few came back. The bunks there had
two stories. And anyone on an upper who was sick and running
a fever wasn‘t able to clamber down to go to the toilet—and so
it would all pour down on the people underneath. There were
fifteen hundred sick there. And all the orderlies were thieves.
They‘d pull out the gold teeth from the corpses. And not only
from the corpses."

"Why do you keep going on and on about 1937? What about
1949 on Vanino Bay, in the fifth compound? What about that?
There were 35,000! And for several months too! There was an—
other bottleneck in transport to the Kolyma. And every night for
some reason they kept driving people from one barracks to an—
other and from one compound to another. Just as it was with the
Fascists: Whistles! Screams! ‘Come on out there without the last
one!‘ And everyone went on the run! Always on the run! They‘d
drive a hundred to get bread—on the run‘! For gruel—on the
run! No bowls to eat from. Take the gruel in whatever you
could—the flap of your coat, your hands! They brought water
in big tanks and there was nothing to distribute it in, so they shot
it out in sprays. And whoever could get his mouth in front of one

1. "Without the last one!"—a menacing command to be understood literally.
It meant: "I will kill the last man" (literally or at least warm his hide with a
club). And so all piled out so as not to be last.
