610 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

eight whole months—imprisoned in the Butyrki, he uttered not
one word. "And didn‘t they torture you?" "No!" His lips twitched
as though to indicate he didn‘t even consider such a thing possible
in the case of a non—Soviet citizen. (Beat your own people so
foreigners will be more afraid of you! But a real spy‘s a gold
mine! After all, we may have to use him for an exchange.) The
day came when they showed him the newspapers: Rumania had
capitulated; come on, now, testify. He continued to keep silent:
the newspapers could have been forgeries. They showed him an
order of the Rumanian General Staff: under the conditions of the
armistice the General Staff ordered all its intelligence agents to
cease operations and surrender. He continued to keep silent.
(The order could have been a forgery.) Finally he was con—
fronted with his immediate superior on the General Staff, who
ordered him to disclose his information and surrender. At this
point Vladimirescu coldbloodedly gave his testimony, and now,
in the slow passing of the cell day, it was no longer of any im—
portance and he told me some of it too. They had not even tried
him! They had not even given him a sentence! (After all, he
wasn‘t one of our own! "I am a career man—and will remain one
until I die. And they won‘t waste me.")

"But you are revealing yourself to me," I pointed out. "I might
very well remember your face. Just imagine our meeting someday
in public."

"If I am convinced that you haven‘t recognized me, you will
remain alive. If you recognize me, I will kill you, or else force you
to work for us."

He had not the slightest desire to spoil his relationship with his
cell neighbor. He said this very simply, with total conviction.
I was really convinced that he wouldn‘t hesitate for a moment to
gun someone down or cut their throat. .

In this whole long prisoners‘ chronicle, we will not again meet
such a hero. It was the only encounter of the sort I ever had in my
eleven years of prison, camp, and exile, and others didn‘t even
have one. And our mass—circulation comics try to dupe young
people into believing that these are the only people the Organs
catch.

It was enough to look around that church cell to grasp that it
was youth itself the Organs were catching in the first place. The
