The Ships of the Archipelago | 511

were satisfied with the reduced bread ration. It was also fair be—
cause the belongings were, after all, worth something, and it was
right that they should be paid for. And it was also fair in the long
view because those things were simply too good for camp and
were destined anyway to be taken away or stolen there.

The makhorka had belonged to the guard. The soldiers shared
their precious makhorka with the prisoners. And that was fair,
too, since they had eaten the prisoners‘ bread and drunk up their
sugar, which was too good for enemies anyway. And, last, it was
only fair, too, that Sanin and Merezhkov took the largest share
for themselves even though they‘d contributed nothing—because
without them all this would not have been arranged.

And so they sat crammed in there, in the semidarkness, and
some of them chewed on their neighbors‘ chunks of bread and
their neighbors sat there and watched them. The guard permitted
smoking only on a collective basis, every two hours—and the
whole car was as filled with smoke as if there‘d been a fire. Those
who at first had clung to their things now regretted that they
hadn‘t given them to Sanin and asked him to take them, but
Sanin said he‘d only take them later on.

This whole operation wouldn‘t have worked so well and so
thoroughly had it not been for the slow trains and slow Stolypin
cars of the immediate postwar years, when they kept unhitching
them from one train and hitching them to another and held them
waiting in the stations. And, at the same time, if it hadn‘t been
the immediate postwar period, neither would there have been
those greed—inspiring belongings. Their train took a week to get
to Kuibyshev—and during that entire week they got only nine
ounces of bread a day. (This, to be sure, was twice the ration
distributed during the siege of Leningrad.) And they did get dried
Caspian carp and water, in addition. They had to ransom their
remaining bread ration with their personal possessions. And soon
the supply of these articles exceeded the demand, and the convoy
guards became very choosy and reluctant to take more things.

They were received at the Kuibyshev Transit Prison, given
baths, and returned as a group to that very same Stolypin. The
convoy which took them over was new—but, in passing on the
relay baton, the previous crew had evidently told them how to
put the squeeze on, and the very same system of ransoming their
