112 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

intact. Sleeplessness (yes, combined with standing, thirst, bright
light, terror, and the unknown—what other tortures are
needed!?) befogs the reason, undermines the will, and the human
being ceases to be himself, to be his own "I." (As in Chekhov‘s
"I Want to Sleep," but there it was much easier, for there the girl
could lie down and slip into lapses of consciousness, which even in
just a minute would revive and refresh the brain.) A person
deprived of sleep acts half—unconsciously or altogether uncon—
sciously, so that his testimony cannot be held against him.*"

They used to say: "You are not truthful in your testimony,
and therefore you will not be allowed to sleep!" Sometimes, as
a refinement, instead of making the prisoner stand up, they made
him sit down on a soft sofa, which made him want to sleep all
the more. (The jailer on duty sat next to him on the same sofa
and kicked him every time his eyes began to shut.) Here is how
one victim—who had just sat out days in a box infested with
bedbugs—describes his feelings after this torture: "Chill from
great loss of blood. Irises of the eyes dried out as if someone
were holding a red—hot iron in front of them. Tongue swollen
from thirst and prickling as from a hedgehog at the slightest
movement. Throat racked by spasms of swallowing."""

Sleeplessness was a great form of torture: it left no visible
marks and could not provide grounds for complaint even if an
inspection—something unheard of anyway—were to strike on
the morrow."" .

"They didn‘t let you sleep? Well, after all, this is not supposed
to be a vacation resort. The Security officials were awake too!"
(They would catch up on their sleep during the day.) One can
say that sleeplessness became the universal method in the Organs.
From being one among many tortures, it became an integral
part of the system of State Security; it was the cheapest possible

15. Just picture a foreigner, who knows no Russian, in this muddled state, being
given something to sign. Under these conditions the Bavarian Jupp Aschen—
brenner signed a document admitting that he had worked on wartime gas vans.
It was not until 1954, in camp, that he was finally able to prove that at the time
he had been in Munich, studying to become an electric welder.

16. G. M——ch.

17. Inspection, by the way, was so totally impossible and had so emphatically
never taken place that in 1953, when real inspectors entered the cell of former
Minister of State Security Abakumov, himself a prisoner by that time, he roared
with laughter, thinking their appearance was a trick intended to confuse him.
