That Spring | 273

after wave of prisoners has thirsted for and believed in either an
amnesty, or a new Code, or a general review of cases. And the
rumors about these things have always been supported by the
Organs with skilled caution. The prisoner‘s imagination sees
the ardently awaited arrival of the angel of liberation in just about
anything: the next anniversary of the October Revolution, Len—
in‘s anniversaries, Victory Day, Red Army Day, Paris Commune
Day, every new session of the All—Russian Central Executive
Committee—the VTsIK—the end of every Five—Year Plan,
every Plenary Session of the Supreme Court! And the wilder the
arrests, the more Homeric and mind—boggling the scale of the
waves of prisoners, the more they inspired not sober—mindedness
but faith in amnesty!

All sources of light can to some degree be compared with the
Sun. And the Sun cannot be compared with anything. So it is
that all the expectations in the world can be compared with the
expectation of amnesty, but the expectation of amnesty cannot
be compared with anything else.

In the spring of 1945, every newcomer to the cell was asked
first of all what he had heard about an amnesty. And if two or
three prisoners were taken from their cells with their things, the
cell experts immediately compared cases and drew the conclusion
that theirs were the least serious cases and they had clearly been
taken out to be released. It had begun! In the toilet and in the
baths—the prisoners‘ post offices—our "activists" looked every—
where for signs and graffiti about the amnesty. And one day at the
beginning of July, in the famous lavender vestibule of the Butyrki
baths, we read the enormous prophecy written in soap on a glazed
lavender slab far higher than a man‘s head—which meant that
one man had stood on another‘s shoulders in order to write it in
a place where it would take longer to erase:

"Hurrah!! Amnesty on July 17!"**

What a celebration went on! ("After all, if they hadn‘t known
for sure, they wouldn‘t have written it!") Everything that beat,
pulsed, circulated in the body came to a stop beneath the wave of
happiness, the expectation that the doors were about to swing
open.

But . . . for mercy one must have wisdom.

18. Indeed, the bastards were wrong by only one digit! For more details on
the great Stalin amnesty of July 7, 1945, see Part III, Chapter 6.
