The Slave Caravans | 573

lights and hammering: Have you sawed through any place? No.
Then the convoy guards stand in the middle and begin to shift
you from left to right, counting: "First . . . second . . . third." It
would be quite enough to count simply with a wave of the finger,
but if that were done, it wouldn‘t be terrifying, and so it is more
vivid, less subject to error, more energetic and faster, to beat out
that count with the same mallet on your ribs, shoulders, heads,
wherever it happens to land. They have counted up to forty. So
now they will go about their tossing, lighting up, and hammering
at the other end of the car. It‘s all over finally and the car is locked
up. You can go back to sleep till the next stop. (And one can‘t
really say that the anxiety of the convoy guard is entirely un—
founded—because those who know how can escape from the red
cattle cars. For instance, they knock on a board to test it and
find it has been partially sawed through. Or suddenly in the
morning, when the gruel is being distributed, they see that there
are several shaved faces among the unshaven ones. And they
surround the car with their automatic pistols: "Hand over your
knives!" And this is really just petty bravado on the part of
the thieves and their allies: they got tired of being unshaven, and
now they are going to have to turn in their razor.)

The red train differs from other long—distance trains in that
those who have embarked on it do not know whether or not they
will disembark. When they unloaded a trainload from the Lenin—
grad prisons (1942) in Solikamsk, the entire embankment was
covered with corpses, and only a few got there alive. In the
winters of 1944—1945 and 1945—1946 in the village of Zhelez—
nodorozhny (Knyazh—Pogost), as in all the main rail junctions
in the North, the prisoner trains from liberated territories (the
Baltic states, Poland, Germany) arrived with one or two car—
loads of corpses tacked on behind. That meant that en route they
had carefully taken the corpses out of the cars that contained
the living passengers and put them in the dead cars. But not
always. There were many occasions when they found out who was
still alive and who was dead only when they opened up the car
after arriving at the Sukhobezvodnaya (Unzhlag) Station. Those
who didn‘t come out were dead.

It was terrifying and deadly to travel this way in winter be—
cause the convoy, with all its bother about security, wasn‘t able
