218 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

to catch with words or to circumyvent with syllogisms what that
camp was. That was a camp to die in—and whoever did not die
was compelled to reach certain conclusions.

Among those who could survive were the Ordners—the in—
ternal camp police or Polizei—chosen from among the prisoners.
Of course, Yuri did not become an Ordner. The cooks managed
to survive too. The translators could survive also—they needed
them. But though Yuri had a superb command of conversational
German, he concealed this fact. He realized that a translator
would have to betray his fellow prisoners. One could also post—
pone dying by digging graves, but others stronger and more
dexterous got those jobs. Yuri announced that he was an artist.
And, actually, as part of his varied education at home, he had
been given lessons in painting. Yuri didn‘t paint badly in oils,
and only his desire to follow in his father‘s footsteps—for he had
been proud of his father—had kept him from entering art school.

Together with an elderly artist (I regret that I don‘t remember
his name) he occupied a separate room in the barracks. And
there Yuri painted for nothing schmaltzy pictures such as Nero‘s
Feast and the Chorus of Elves and the like for the German
officers on the commandant‘s staff. In return, he was given food.
The slops for which the POW officers stood in line with their
mess tins from 6 a.m. on, while the Ordners beat them with
sticks and the cooks with ladles, were not enough to sustain life.
At evening, Yuri could see from the windows of their room the
one and only picture for which his artistic talent had been given
him: the evening mist hovering above a swampy meadow en—
circled by barbed wire; a multitude of bonfires; and, around the
bonfires, beings who had once been Russian officers but had now
become beastlike creatures who gnawed the bones of dead horses,
who baked patties from potato rinds, who smoked manure and
were all swarming with lice. Not all those two—legged creatures
had died as yet. Not all of them had yet lost the capacity for in—
telligible speech, and one—could see in the crimson reflections of
the bonfires how a belated understanding was dawning on those
faces which were descending to the Neanderthal.

Wormwood on the tongue! That life which Yuri had preserved
was no longer precious to him for its own sake. He was not one
of those who easily agree to forget. No, if he was going to survive,
he was obliged to draw certain conclusions. —
