Tyurzak | 465

test meetings at Kazan Cathedral. Silence was already confi—
dently shaping our history.

The monasteries lifted the hunger strike. They had not won
out, but they hadn‘t lost either. The political regimen was left
intact for the winter, except that cutting firewood in the forests
was added, but that was logical enough. And in the spring of 1925
it looked as though the hunger strike had brought victory: the
prisoners from all three monastery prisons were removed from
Solovki! To the mainland! No more Arctic night and no more
half—year cut off from communication!

But both the convoy and their—rations en route were very harsh
for that time. And soon they were all perfidiously tricked: On
the pretext that their spokesmen would be more comfortable in
the "staff" car with the stores and equipment, they were deprived
of their leaders. The "staff" car was detached at Vyatka, and the
spokesmen were taken to the Tobolsk Isolator. Only at that point
did it become clear that the hunger strike of the previous fall had
failed. The strong and influential spokesmen had been taken away
so as to tighten up on the rest. Yagoda and Katanyan personally
directed the incarceration of the former Solovetsky Islands pris—
oners in the long—standing but until then unused buildings of the
Verkhne—Uralsk Isolator, which they thus "opened" in the spring
of 1925 (under Chief Dupper). It was destined to be a particular
bugbear to prisoners for many decades ahead.

The relocated former Solovki prisoners immediately lost their
freedom to move about. The cells were locked. They succeeded
in electing spokesmen nonetheless, but the spokesmen didn‘t have
the right to go from—cell to cell. The unlimited circulation between
cells of money, personal articles, and books, which had existed
earlier, was now forbidden. They shouted back and forth from
window to window—until the guard fired from his tower into the
cells. In reply they organized a protest—they broke windowpanes
and destroyed prison equipment. (And, after all, breaking a
windowpane is something to think about twice. They might just
not replace it all winter, and there would be no big surprise in
that. It was under the Tsar that the glaziers used to come on the
run.) The struggle continued, but it was now being carried on in
desperation and under grave handicaps.

In the year 1928 (according to Pyotr Petrovich Rubin) some
