418 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

flat on his back! And this, too, was probably something Koba
couldn‘t forgive him.)

And in the case of one so fully prepared, so demolished, that no
torture was called for, how was his position any stronger than
that of Yakubovich in 1931? How could he not be susceptible to
the same two arguments? He was in fact much weaker, because
Yakubovich longed for death, and Bukharin dreaded it.

There remained an easy dialogue with Vyshinsky along set
lines:

"Is it true that every opposition to the Party is a struggle against
the Party?" "In general it is, factually it is." "But a struggle against
the Party cannot help but grow into a war against the Party."
"According to the logic of things—yes, it must." "And that means
that in the end, given the existence of oppositionist beliefs, any
foul deeds whatever might be perpetrated against the Party [es—
pionage, murder, sellout of the Motherland]?" "But wait a minute, ..
none were actually committed." "But they could have been?"
"Well, theoretically speaking." (Those are your theoreticians for
you!) "But for us the highest of all interests are those of the
Party?" "Yes, of course, of course!" "So you see, only a very fine
distinction separates us. We are required to concretize the eventu—
ality: in the interest of discrediting for the future any idea of
opposition, we are required to accept as having taken place what
could only theoretically have taken place. After all, it could
have, couldn‘t it?" "It could have." "And so it is necessary to
recognize as actual what was possible; that‘s all. It‘s a small phi—
losophical transition. Are we in agreement? . . . Yes, and— one
thing more, and it‘s not for me to explain to you, but if you re—
treat and say something different during the trial, you understand
that it will only play into the hands of the world bourgeoisie and
will only do the Party harm. Well, and it‘s clear that in that case
you yourself will not die an easy death. But if everything goes
off all right, we will, of course, allow you to go on living. We‘ll
send you in secret to the island of Monte Cristo, and you can
work on the economics of socialism there." "But in previous trials,
as I understand it, you did shoot them all?" "But what comparison
is there between you and them! And then, we also left many of
them alive too. They were shot only in the newspapers."

And so perhaps there isn‘t any insoluble riddle?
