562 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

During the years when the prisoners‘ cases didn‘t carry any
indication of their final destination, the transit prisons turned into
slave markets. The most desired guests at the transit prisons were
the buyers. This word was heard more and more often in the
corridors and cells and was used without any shadow of irony.
Just as it became intolerable everywhere in industry simply to sit
and wait until things were sent from the center on the basis of
allocations, and it was more satisfactory to send one‘s own
"pushers" and "pullers" to get things done—the same thing hap—
pened in Gulag: the natives on the islands kept dying off; and
even though they cost not one ruble, a count was kept of them,
and one had to worry about getting more of them for oneself so
there wouldn‘t be any failure in fulfilling the plan. The buyers had
to be sharp, have good eyes, and look carefully to see what they
were taking so that last—leggers and invalids didn‘t get shoved
off on them. The buyers who picked a transport on the basis of
case files were poor buyers. The conscientious merchants de—
manded that the merchandise be displayed alive and bare—skinned
for them to inspect. And that was just what they used to say—
without smiling—merchandise. "Well, what merchandise have
you brought?" asked a buyer at the Butyrki station, observing
and inspecting the female attributes of seventeen—year—old Ira
Kalina.

Human nature, if it changes at all, changes not much faster
than the geological face of the earth. And the very same sensa—
tions of curiosity, relish, and sizing up which slave—traders felt
at the slave—girl markets twenty—five centuries ago of course pos—
sessed the Gulag bigwigs in the Usman Prison in 1947, when they,
a couple of dozen men in MVD uniform, sat at several desks
covered with sheets (this was for their self—importance, since it
would have seemed awkward otherwise), and all the women
prisoners were made to undress in the box next door and to walk
in front of them bare—footed and bare—skinned, turn around, stop,
and answer questions. "Drop your hands," they ordered those
who had adopted the defensive pose of classic sculpture. (After
all, these officers were very seriously selecting bedmates for them—
selves and their colleagues.)

And so it was that for the new prisoner various manifestations
foreshadowed the camp battle of the morrow and cast their pall
over the innocent spiritual joys of the transit prison.
