The Law Becomes a Man | 365

but I hope that my time has not yet gone."*> (It has gone, darling,
all gone!)

Of course, there is in all this an element of the ancient passion
for the resounding phrase, but there is firmness too.

The prosecutor argued: the accused are dangerous to Soviet
Russia because they consider everything they did to have been a
good thing. "Perhaps certain of the defendants find their own
consolation in the hope that some future chronicler will praise
them or their conduct at the trial.""

And a decree of the All—Russian Central Executive Committee
issued after the trial declared: "At the trial itself they reserved
to themselves the right to continue" their former activity.

The defendant Gendelman—Grabovsky (a lawyer himself) was
conspicuous during the trial for his arguments with Krylenko on
tampering with the testimony of witnesses and on "special methods
of treating witnesses before the trial"—in other words, the
obvious working—over they had gotten from the GPU. (It is all
there! All the elements are there! There was only a little way to
go before attaining the ideal.) Apparently the preliminary in—
terrogation had been conducted under the supervision of the
prosecutor—that same Krylenko. And during that process in—
dividual instances of a lack of consistency in testimony had been
ironed out. Yet some testimony was presented for the first time
only at the trial itself.

Well, so what! So there were some rough spots. So it wasn‘t
perfect. But in the last analysis, "We have to declare altogether
clearly and coldly that . . . we are not concerned with the question
of how the court of history is going to view our present deed.""*

And as far as the rough spots are concerned, we will take them
under advisement and correct them.

But as it was, Krylenko, squirming, had to bring up—prob—
ably for the first and last time in Soviet jurisprudence—the matter
of the inquiry, the initial inquiry required before investigation.
And here‘s how cleverly he handled this point: The proceeding
which took place in the absence of the prosecutor and which you
considered the investigation was actually the inquiry. And the
proceeding in the presence of the prosecutor which you regarded

32. Ibid.
33. Ibid., p. 325.
34. Ibid.
