Translator‘s Notes | 617

The author‘s decision to publish this work was triggered by a
tragedy of August, 1973: A Leningrad woman to whom the
author had entrusted a portion of his manuscript for safekeeping
broke down after 120 sleepless hours of intensive questioning by
Soviet Security officers and revealed where she had hidden it—
enabling them to seize it. Thereupon, in her desperation and
depression, she committed suicide. It is to this event that the
author refers in the statement that precedes the text: "Now that
State Security has seized the book anyway, I have no alternative
but to publish it immediately."

This present English—language edition of Parts I and II of The
Gulag Archipelago differs very slightly, as a result of author‘s
corrections and other corrections, from the Russian—language first
edition of these parts which was published by the YMCA—Press
in Paris in late December, 1973.

The Gulag Archipelago is a sweeping, panoramic work which
consists in all of seven parts divided into three volumes—of which
this present book, the first volume, contains two parts, represent—
ing about one—third of the whole.

One of the important aspects of Solzhenitsyn as a Russian
literary figure is his contribution to the revival and expansion
of the Russian literary language through introducing readers in
his own country (and abroad) to the language, terminology, and
slang of camps, prisons, the police, and the underworld. Millions
of Soviet citizens became fully familiar with a whole new vocabu—
lary through imprisonment. But this vocabulary did not find its
way into Russian literature until Solzhenitsyn put it there—to
the bewilderment of some of the uninitiated.

In this category there are terms in this book which require
explanation.

Soviet Security services personnel, for example, are referred
to in a variety of special epithets, some of them carrying overtones
of contempt. Most of these have been manufactured from the
various initials, at one time and another, of the basic Soviet secret
police organization:

The oldest of these terms is, of course, "Chekist"—pronounced
"Che—keest," with the accent on the last syllable—from "Chek&@."
Though the name "Cheka" was replaced more than half a century
ago, this label for Soviet Security personnel is still used—and is
much beloved by the personnel of the Organs themselves.
