The Law as a Child | 331

(great) biologist N. K. Koltsov (who never received anything
from the Motherland except persecution and execution) allowed
all those bourgeois big shots to get together in his institute for
their discussions. (N. D. Kondratyev was included here also.
In 1931 he was condemned once and for all in connection with
TKP—the fictitious Working Peasants Party.)

Our accuser‘s heart jumps right out of our chest, outrunning
the sentence. Well, what punishment was adequate for these as—
sistants to the general? Just one, of course—to be shot! That was
not merely what the accuser demanded—it was the sentence of
the tribunal. (Alas, it was later commuted to concentration camp
until the end of the Civil War.)

And indeed the defendants‘ guilt consisted in the fact that
they hadn‘t sat in their own corners, sucking on their quarter—
pound of bread; that "they had talked things over and reached
agreements as to what the state structure should be after the fall
of the Soviet regime."

In contemporary scientific language, this is known as the study
of the alternative possibility.

The voice of the accuser thundered, but we hear some kind
of crack in it. As if his eyes were searching the rostrum, looking
for another piece of paper? A quotation, perhaps? Give it to
him on tiptoe, quick, quick! Give him one at random! From some
other trial? It‘s not important! Wasn‘t this the one, Nikolai
Vasilyevich Krylenko?

"For us . . . the concept of torture inheres in the very fact of
holding political prisoners in prison. . . ."

So that‘s it! It is torture to keep political prisoners in prison!
And the accuser said so! What a generous view! A new jurispru—
dence is arising! And further:

". . . Struggle against the Tsarist government was second
nature to them [the politicals] and not to struggle against Tsarism
was something of which they were incapable."*"

What‘s that? They were incapable of not studying alternative
possibilities? Perhaps thinking was first nature to the intellectual?

Alas, through stupidity, they had shoved the wrong quotation
at him. Now wasn‘t that a mix—up for you! But Nikolai Vasilyevich
was already off to the races.

"And even if the defendants here in Moscow did not lift a

63. Ibid., p. 17.
