428 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

the trial could have been called off right then and there. But, oh
no, they didn‘t have sense enough for that, or tact enough for
that, and they kept rubbing away at the befouled spot for three
more days.

The prosecutor raised a hue and cry: Double—dealing! That‘s
what it was. They engaged in wrecking with one hand and with
the other they dared write Comrade Stalin. And they even ex—
pected a reply from him. Let the defendant Vlasov tell us how he
pulled off such a nightmarish piece of wrecking that he stopped
the sale of flour and the baking of rye bread in the district
center.

Vlasov, the bantam rooster, didn‘t have to be asked to rise—he
had already jumped up, and he shouted resoundingly through
the hall:

"I agree to give a full answer to the court, but on condition
that you, the prosecutor, Karasik, leave the accuser‘s rostrum and
sit down here next to me!" It was incomprehensible. Noise, shout—
ing. Call them to order! What was going on?

Having gotten the floor with this maneuver, Vlasov explained
willingly.

"The prohibitions on selling flour and baking rye bread were
instituted by a decree of the Provincial Executive Committee. One
of the permanent members of its presidium is Provincial Prose—
cutor Karasik. If that‘s wrecking, then why didn‘t you veto it as
prosecutor? That means you were a wrecker even before I
was!"

The prosecutor choked. It was a swift, well—placed blow. The
court was also at a loss. The judge mumbled.

"If necessary [?] we will try the prosecutor too. But today we
are trying you."

(Two truths: it all depends on your rank.)

"I demand that he be removed from the prosecutor‘s rostrum,"
insisted the indefatigable, irrepressible Vlasov.

Recess.

Now, in terms of indoctrinating the masses, just what sig—
nificance could such a trial have?

But they kept on and on. After questioning the defendants they
began to question the witnesses. The bookkeeper N.

"What do you know about Vlasov‘s wrecking activities?"

"Nothing."
