326 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

tion—representatives of the ungrateful "Orthodox church,
liberated by the October Revolution.""

The reader will be aware of a conflict here: why did many of
these trials occur earlier than the Moscow model? This is simply
a shortcoming of our exposition. The judicial and the extrajudicial
persecution of the liberated church had begun well back in 1918,
and, judging by the Zvenigorod affair, it had already reached a
peak of intensity by that summer. In October, 1918, Patriarch
Tikhon had protested in a message to the Council of People‘s
Commissars that there was no freedom to preach in the churches
and that "many courageous priests have already paid for their
preaching with the blood of martyrdom. . . . You have laid your
hands on church property collected by generations of believers,
and you have not hesitated to violate their posthumous intent."
(The People‘s Commissars did not, of course, read the message,
but the members of their administrative staff must have had a
good laugh: Now they‘ve really got something to reproach us
with—posthumous intent! We sh—t on your ancestors! We are
only interested in descendants.) "They are executing bishops,
priests, monks, and nuns who are guilty of nothing, on the basis of
indiscriminate charges of indefinite and vaguely counterrevolu—
tionary offenses." True, with the approach of Denikin and
Kolchak, this was stopped, so as to make it easier for Orthodox
believers to defend the Revolution. But hardly had the Civil War
begun to die down than they took up their cudgels against the
church again, and the cases started rolling through the tribunals
once more. In 1920 they struck at the Trinity—St. Sergius Mona—
stery and went straight to the holy relics of that chauvinist Sergius
of Radonezh, and hauled them off to a Moscow museum."

53. Krylenko, op. cit., p. 61.

54. The Patriarch cited Klyuchevsky: "The gates of the monastery of the
Saint will shut and the ikon lamps will be extinguished over his sepulcher only
when we shall have lost every vestige of that spiritual and moral strength willed
to us by such great builders of the Russian land as Saint Sergius." Klyuchevsky
did not imagine that the loss would occur almost in his own lifetime. The
Patriarch asked for an appointment with the Chairman of the Council of
People‘s Commissars, in the hope of persuading him not to touch the holy
monastery and the relics . . . for after all the church was separate from the
state! The answer came back that the Chairman was occupied in discussing
important business, and that the appointment could not be arranged for the
near future.

Nor for the distant future either.
