440 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

property, and counterfeiting, and terrorism in places of imprison—
ment (this was directed especially at prisoners who killed in—
formers and terrorized the camp administration); in July, 1961,
for violating the rules governing foreign currency transactions;
in February, 1962, for threatening the lives of (shaking a fist at)
policemen or Communist vigilantes, the so—called "druzhinniki";
then for rape; and immediately thereafter for bribery.

But all of this is simply temporary—until complete abolition.
And that‘s how it‘s described today too.‘

And so it turns out that Russia managed longest of all without
capital punishment in the reign of the Empress Elizabeth
Petrovna.

In our happy, blind existence, we picture condemned men as a
few ill—fated, solitary individuals. We instinctively believe that
we could never end up on death row, that it would take an out—
standing career if not heinous guilt for that to happen. A great
deal has still to be shaken up inside our heads for us to get the
real picture: a mass of the most ordinary, average, gray people
have languished in death cells for the most ordinary, everyday
misdemeanors, and, although some were lucky and had their
death sentences commuted, which was purely a matter of chance,
they very often got the super (which is what the prisoners called
"the supreme measure," since they hate lofty words and manage
somehow to give everything a nickname that is both crude and
short).

The agronomist of a District Agricultural Department got a
death sentence for his mistaken analysis of collective farm grain!
(Maybe it was because his analysis wasn‘t what his chiefs wanted
from him?) That was in 1937.

Melnikov, the chairman of a handicraft artel that made
spools for thread, was sentenced to death because a spark from
a steam engine in his artel had caused a fire! That was in 1937.
(True, his death sentence was commuted to a "tenner.")

7. "Osnovy Ugolovnogo Zakonodatelstva SSSR" ("Fundamental Principles
of Criminal Legislation of the U.S.S.R."), Article 22, in Vedomosti Ver—

khovnogo Soveta SSSR (Bulletin of the Supreme Soviet of the U.S.S.R.),
1959, No. 1.
