266 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

they were charged with: actions directed toward the overthrow
of the government of the workers‘ and peasants‘ soviets; armed
incursion into Soviet territory, in other words, not having im—
mediately left Russia when Petrograd was declared Soviet; aiding
the international bourgeoisie (which they had never seen even
in their dreams) ; serving counterrevolutionary governments (i.e.,
their own generals, to whom they had been subordinate all their
lives). And all these sections—Nos. 1, 2, 4, 13—of Article 58
were included in a Criminal Code adopted in 1926, that is, six
to seven years after the end of the Civil War. This was a classic
and unconscionable example of the ex post facto application of
a law! In addition, Article 2 of the Code specified that it applied
only to citizens taken into custody on the territory of the Russian
Republic. But State Security‘s strong right arm had grabbed
people who were in no wise Soviet citizens from all the countries
of Europe and Asia."* And we won‘t even bring up the question
of statutes of limitations. This question was provided for very
flexibly—no statutes of limitations applied to Article 58. ("Why
stir up the past indeed?") Such statutes are invoked only in the
case of our home—grown executioners, who have destroyed many,
many more of their compatriots than did the whole Civil War.

Mariyushkin, at least, remembered everything clearly. He told
us the details of being evacuated from Novorossisk. But Borshch
had already descended into second childhood and prattled on
and on about celebrating Easter in the Lubyanka: he had eaten
only half his bread ration during Palm Sunday week and Holy
Week and had set the rest of it aside, gradually replacing the
stale pieces with fresh ones. Thus he had accumulated seven full
rations when it came time to break the Lenten fast—and he had
"feasted" for the three days of Easter.

I do not know what kind of White Guards they were in the
Civil War, either of them, whether they were among the ex—
ceptional few who hung every tenth worker without trial and
whipped the peasants, or whether they were the other kind, the
soldierly majority. The fact that they were being interrogated
and sentenced in Moscow was no proof of anything nor a matter

14. On this basis no single African leader has any assurance that we will
not, ten years from now, promulgate a law in accordance with which we will

put him on trial for what he does today. Yes. The Chinese, in fact, will pro—
mulgate precisely such laws—just give them the chance to reach out that far.
