148 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

to our boys) constituted for Ivan Ilyich the chief interest and at—
traction of the service.

But attraction is not the right word—it is infoxication! After
all, it is intoxicating. You are still young—still, shall we say paren—
thetically, a sniveling youth. Only a little while ago your parents
were deeply concerned about you and didn‘t know where to turn
to launch you in life. You were such a fool you didn‘t even want
to study, but you got through three years of that school—and then
how you took off and flew! How your situation changed! How your
gestures changed, your glance, the turn of your head! The learned
council of the scientific institute is in session. You enter and every—
one notices you and trembles. You don‘t take the chairman‘s chair.
Those headaches are for the rector to take on. You sit off to one
side, but everyone understands that you are head man there. You
are the Special Department. And you can sit there for just five
minutes and then leave. You have that advantage over the pro—
fessors. You can be called away by more important business—but
later on, when you‘re considering their decision, you will raise
your eyebrows or, better still, purse your lips and say to the rector:
"You can‘t do that. There are special considerations involved."
That‘s all! And it won‘t be done. Or else you are an osobist—a
State Security representative in the army—a SMERSH man, and
a mere lieutenant; but the portly old colonel, the commander of
the unit, stands up when you enter the room and tries to flatter you,
to play up to you. He doesn‘t even have a drink with his chief
of staff without inviting you to join them. The fact that you have
only two tiny stars on your shoulder boards doesn‘t mean a thing;
it is even amusing. After all, your stars have a very different weight
and are measured on a totally different scale from those of ordi—
nary officers. (On special assignments you are sometimes even
authorized to wear major‘s insignia, for example, which is a sort
of incognito, a convention.) You have a power over all the people
in that military unit, or factory, or district, incomparably greater
than that of the military commander, or factory director, or
secretary of the district Communist Party. These men control
people‘s military or official duties, wages, reputations, but you
control people‘s freedom. And no one dares speak about you at
meetings, and no one will ever dare write about you in the news—
paper—not only something bad but anything good/ They don‘t
dare. Your name, like that of a jealously guarded deity, cannot
