The Law Matures | 389

founded on Ramzin‘s recollections. He possessed such self—control
and force that he might very well have conducted plenipotentiary
talks in Paris about intervention (on assignment from the GPU,
obviously). Ochkin, too, was a fast climber: at twenty—nine he
had already possessed "the unlimited trust of the Council of Labor
and Defense and the Council of People‘s Commissars."

One couldn‘t say the same about sixty—two—year—old Professor
Charnovsky: Anonymous students had persecuted him in the
wall newspapers. After twenty—three years of lecturing, he had
been summoned to a general students‘ meeting to "give an
account of his work." He hadn‘t gone.

And in 1921 Professor Kalinnikov had headed an open
struggle against the Soviet government—specifically a professors‘
strike. What it amounted to was this: Back in the days of the
Stolypin repression, the Moscow Higher Technical School had
won academic autonomy (including the right to fill important
posts, elect a rector, etc.). In 1921 the professors in this school
had re—elected Kalinnikov to a new term as rector, but the People‘s
Commissariat didn‘t want him there and had designated its own
candidate. However, the professors went on strike and were
supported by the students—at that time there were no truly
proletarian students—and Kalinnikov was rector for a whole year
despite the wishes of the Soviet government. (It was only in 1922
that they had wrung the neck of that autonomy, and even then,
in all probability, not without arrests.)

Fedotov was sixty—six years old and he had been a factory
engineer eleven years longer than the whole life span of
the Russian Social Democratic Workers‘ Party—from which the
Soviet Communist Party had sprung. He had worked at all the
spinning mills and textile factories in Russia. (How hateful such
people are, and how desirable it is to get rid of them as quickly
as possible!) In 1905 he had left his position as a director of
the Morozov textile firm and the high salary which went with it
because he preferred to attend the "Red Funerals" which fol—
lowed the caskets of the workers killed by the Cossacks. And now
he was ill, had poor eyesight, and was too weak to leave home at
night even to go to the theater.

And such people organized intervention? And economic ruin?

Charnovsky had not had any free evenings for many years be—
