436 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

1920. Yes, indeed! And some students of the subject might con—
ceivably be at a loss to interpret the credulity and helplessness
of a dictatorship that deprived itself of its avenging sword when
Denikin was still in the Kuban, Wrangel still in the Crimea, and
the Polish cavalry were saddling up for a campaign. But, in the
first place, this decree was quite sensible: it did not extend to the
decisions of military tribunals, but applied only to extrajudicial
actions of the Cheka and the decisions of tribunals in the rear.
In the second place, the way was prepared for it by first cleaning
out the prisons by the wholesale execution of prisoners who might
otherwise have come "under the decree." And, in the third
place, it was in effect for a brief period—four months. (It lasted
only until the prisons had filled up again.) By a decree of May
28, 1920, capital punishment was restored to the Cheka.

The Revolution had hastened to rename everything, so that
everything would seem new. Thus the death penalty was re—
christened "the supreme measure"—no longer a "punishment"
but a means of social defense. From the groundwork of the
criminal legislation of 1924 it is clear that the supreme measure
was introduced only temporarily, pending its total abolition by
the All—Russian Central Executive Committee.

And in 1927 they actually did begin to abolish it. It was re—
tained solely for crimes against the state and the army—Article
58 and military crimes—and, true, for banditry also. (But the
broad political interpretation of "banditry" was as well known
then as it is now: from a Central Asian "Basmach," right up to
a Lithuanian forest guerrilla, every armed nationalist who doesn‘t
agree with the central government is a "bandit," and how could
one possibly get along without that article? Similarly, any par—
ticipant in a camp rebellion and any participant in an urban
rebellion is also a "bandit.") But where articles protecting
private individuals were concerned, capital punishment was
abolished to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the Revolu—
tion.

And for the fifteenth anniversary, the law of Seven—eighths was
added to the roster of capital punishment—that law so vitally
important to advancing socialism, which guaranteed the Soviet
subject a bullet for each crumb stolen from the state‘s table.

As always happens at the start, they hurried to apply this
