410 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

like any ordinary collective farmer in our time. True, included
in that tenner were three years in the hard—labor central prison,
but that is nothing special either.

The Party leaders who were the defendants in the trials of
1936 to 1938 had, in their revolutionary pasts, known short, easy
imprisonment, short periods in exile, and had never even had a
whiff of hard labor. Bukharin had many petty arrests on his
record, but they amounted to nothing. Apparently, he was never
imprisoned anywhere for a whole year at a time, and he had
just a wee bit of exile on Onega."" Kamenev, despite long years
of propaganda work and travel to all the cities of Russia, spent
only two years in prison and one and a half years in exile. In
our time, even sixteen—year—old kids got five right off. Zinoviev,
believe it or not, never spent as much as three months in prison.
He never received even one sentence! In comparison with the
ordinary natives of our Archipelago they were all callow youths;
they didn‘t know what prison was like. Rykov and I. N. Smirnov
had been arrested several times and had been imprisoned for five
years, but somehow they went through prison very easily, and
they either escaped from exile without any trouble at all or were
released because of an amnesty. Until they were arrested and >
imprisoned in the Lubyanka, they hadn‘t the slightest idea what
a real prison was nor what the jaws of unjust interrogation were
like. (There is no basis for assuming that if Trotsky had fallen
into those jaws, he would have conducted himself with any less
self—abasement, or that his resistance would have proved stronger
than theirs. He had had no occasion to prove it. He, too, had
known only easy ‘imprisonment, no serious interrogations, and
a mere two years of exile in Ust—Kut. The terror Trotsky inspired
as Chairman of the Revolutionary Military Council was some—
thing he acquired very cheaply, and does not at all demonstrate
any true strength of character or courage. Those who have con—
demned many others to be shot often wilt at the prospect of their
own death. The two kinds of toughness are not connected.) And
as for Radek—he was a plain provocateur. (And he wasn‘t the
only one in these three trials!) And Yagoda was an inveterate,
habitual criminal.

35. All the information here comes from Volume 41 of the Granat Encyclo—
pedia, in which either autobiographical or reliable biographical essays on the
leaders of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) are collected.
