348 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

The Presiding Judge: "Do you consider the state‘s laws ob—
ligatory or not?"

The Patriarch: "Yes, I recognize them, to the extent that they
do not contradict the rules of piety."

(Oh, if only everyone had answered just that way! Our whole
history would have been different.)

A debate about church law followed. The Patriarch explained
that if the church itself surrendered its valuables, it was not
sacrilege. But if they were taken away against the church‘s will,
it was. His appeal had not prohibited giving the valuables at all,
but had only declared that seizing them against the will of the
church was to be condemned.

(But that‘s what we wanted—expropriation against the will
of the church!)

Comrade Bek, the presiding judge, was astounded: "Which in
the last analysis is more important to you—the laws of the church
or the point of view of the Soviet government?"

(The expected reply: "The Soviet government.")

"Very well; so it was sacrilege according to the laws of the
church," exclaimed the accuser, "but what was it from the point
of view of mercy?"

(For the first and last time—for another fifty years—that banal
word mercy was spoken before a tribunal.)

Then there was a philological analysis of the word "svyato—
tatstvo," meaning "sacrilege," derived from "svyato," meaning
"holy," and "tat," meaning "thief."

The Accuser: "So that means that we, the representatives of
the Soviet government, are thieves of holy things?"

(A prolonged uproar in the hall. A recess. The bailiffs at
work.)

The Accuser: "So you call the representatives of the Soviet
government, the All—Russian Central Executive Committee,
thieves?"

The Patriarch: "I am citing only church law."

Then there is a discussion of the term "blasphemy." While they
were requisitioning the valuables from the church of St. Basil
the Great of Caesarea, the ikon cover would not fit into a box,
and at that point they trampled it with their feet. But the Patri—
arch himself had not been present.
