The Law Matures | 425

was charged with: (1) initiating bread lines; (2) having an in—
adequate minimum assortment of merchandise (just as though the
unavailable merchandise existed somewhere else and someone
had offered it to Kady); (3) procuring a surplus of salt (but this
was the obligatory "mobilization" reserve: ever since ancient
times people in Russia have been afraid of being without salt in
the event of war).

At the end of September, the defendants were brought to Kady
for public trial. It was not a short trip. (Remember how cheap
the OSO‘s and the closed courts were!) From Ivanovo to Ki—
neshma they went in a Stolypin railway car; then seventy miles
from Kineshma to Kady in automobiles. There were more than
ten cars, an unusual file along an old, deserted road, and one
that aroused astonishment, fear, and the expectation of war in
the villages. Klyugin, the Chief of the Special Secret Department
of the Provincial NKVD for Counter—Revolutionary Organiza—
tions, was responsible for the faultless organization of the whole
trial and for terrifying the public with it. Their convoy consisted
of forty guards from the reserves of the mounted police, and
every day from September 24 to 27, with swords unsheathed and
Naguan revolvers at the ready, they took the prisoners from the
District NKVD to the still unfinished club building and back,
through the village where they had until recently been the gov—
ernment. Windows had already been installed in the club, but the
stage had not yet been finished. There was no electricity. There
was no electricity in Kady at all. After nightfall the court met
by the light of kerosene lamps. The spectators were brought in
from the collective farms in rotation. And all Kady crowded in
as well. Not only did they sit on window sills and benches, but
they stood packed in the aisles, seven hundred of them at a time.
(Russians have always loved spectacles.) The forward benches
were regularly reserved for Communists to provide the court with
dependable support.

A Special Assize of the provincial court had been constituted,
consisting of Deputy Chairman of the Provincial Court Shubin,
who presided, and members Biche and Zaozerov. The provincial
prosecutor Karasik, a graduate of Dorpat University, was in
charge of the prosecution. And even though all the accused de—
clined defense lawyers, a government lawyer was forced on them
