46 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

charged, because the chief engineer had used them inefficiently!
Ladyzhensky died in camp after a year of timbering.

Thus in the course of a few years they broke the back of the
Old Russian engineers who had constituted the glory of the
country, who were the beloved heroes of such writers as Garin—
Mikhailovsky, Chekhov, and Zamyatin.

It is to be understood, of course, that in this wave, as in all of
them, other people were taken too: for example, those who had
been near and dear to and connected with those doomed. I hesi—
tate to sully the shining bronze countenance of the Sentinel of the
Revolution, yet I must: they also arrested persons who refused to
become informers. We would ask the reader to keep in mind at all
times, but especially in connection with the first postrevolutionary
decade, this entirely secret wave, which never surfaced in public:
at that time people still had their pride, and many of them quite
failed to comprehend that morality is a relative thing, having only
a narrow class meaning, and they dared to reject the employment
offered them, and they were all punished without mercy. In fact,
at this time young Magdalena Edzhubova was supposed to act as
an informer on a group of engineers, and she not only dared to
refuse but also told her guardian (it was against him she was sup—
posed to inform). However, he was arrested soon anyway, and in
the course of the investigation he confessed everything. Edzhu—
bova, who was pregnant, was arrested for "revealing an opera—
tional secret" and was sentenced to be shot—but subsequently
managed to get off with a twenty—five—year string of sentences. In
that same year, 1927, though in a completely different milieu,
among the leading Kharkov Communists, Nadezhda Vitalyevna
Surovets refused to become an informer and spy on members of
the Ukrainian government. For this she was arrested by the GPU,
and not until a quarter of a century later did she manage to
emerge, barely alive, in the Kolyma. As for those who didn‘t sur—
vive—of them we know nothing. ‘

(In the thirties this wave of the disobedient fell off to zero:
if they asked you to, then it meant you had to inform—where
would you hide? "The weakest go to the wall." "If I don‘t, some—
one else will." "Better me than someone bad." Meanwhile there
were plenty of volunteers; you couldn‘t get away from them: it
was both profitable and praiseworthy.)
