Tyurzak | 459

evident were the triumphant ethics of the political prisoners, and
the more visibly did the members of the revolutionary parties
realize their strength and regard their own laws as superior to
those of the state.

And that was how Russia of 1917 arrived, bearing 1918 on its
shoulders. The reason we have proceeded immediately to 1918 is
that the subject of our investigation does not permit us to dwell
on 1917. In February, 1917, all political prisons, both those
used for interrogation and those in which sentences were served,
and all hard—labor prisons as well were emptied. It is a wonder

© that all the jailers managed to get through the year. Perhaps to

make ends meet they simply set to work raising potatoes in their
vegetable gardens. (But from 1918 on, things began to get much
better for them, and at Shpalernaya Prison they were still serving
the new regime even in 1928, and why not!)

In December, 1917, it had already become clear that it was
altogether impossible to do without prisons, that some people
simply couldn‘t be left anywhere except behind bars (see Chap—
ter 2, above), because—well, simply because there was no place
for them in the new society. And so it was that the new rulers
managed to feel their way across the space between the two
horns and grope for the budding of the second horn.

Of course, they proclaimed immediately that the horrors of the
Tsarist prisons would not be repeated; that fatiguing correction
would not be permitted; that there would be no compulsory
silence in prison, no solitary confinement, no separating the
prisoners from one another during outdoor walks, no marching
in step and single file, not even any locked cells.* Go ahead, dear
guests, get together, and talk as much as you like and complain
about the Bolsheviks. And the attention of the new prison authori—
ties was directed toward the combat readiness of the prison
guards outside the walls and the takeover of the stock of prisons
inherited from the Tsar. (This was one particular part of the
machinery of state that did not have to be destroyed and rebuilt
from its foundations.) Fortunately, it turned out that the Civil
War had not resulted in the destruction of all the principal
central prisons and jails. What was really necessary, however, was
to repudiate all those old, besmirched words. So now they called

6. Vyshinsky, Of Tyurem k Vospitateinym Uchrezhdeniyam.
