The Bluecaps | 167

They were vehement in their rear—line wrath (the most intense
patriotism always flourishes in the rear), and they added a good
deal more in mother oaths.

They regarded me as some kind of international operator who
had, nonetheless, been caught—and as a result the advance at
the front would move along faster and the war would come to an
end sooner.

How was I to answer them? I was forbidden to utter a single
word, and I would have had to explain my entire life to each and
every one of them. What could I do to make them understand
that I was not a spy, a saboteur? That I was their friend? That it
was because of them that I was here? I smiled. Looking up at
them, I smiled at them from a column of prisoners under escort!
But my bared teeth seemed to them the worst kind of mockery,
and they shook their fists and bellowed insults at me even more
violently than before.

I smiled in pride that I had been arrested not for stealing, nor
treason, nor desertion, but because I had discovered through my
power of reasoning the evil secrets of Stalin. I smiled at the
thought that I wanted, and might still be able, to effect some small
remedies and changes in our Russian way of life.

But all that time my suitcase was being carried by others.

And I didn‘t even feel remorseful about it! And if my neighbor,
whose sunken cheeks were already covered with a soft two—week
growth of beard and whose eyes were filled to overflowing with
suffering and knowledge, had then and there reproached me in
the clearest of clear Russian words for having disgraced the honor
of a prisoner by appealing to the convoy for help and had accused
me of haughtiness, of setting myself above the rest of them, I
would not have understood him! I simply would not have under—
stood what he was talking about. I was an officer!

And if seven of us had to die on the way, and the eighth could
have been saved by the convoy, what was to keep me from crying
out: "Sergeant! Save me. I am an officer!"

And that‘s what an officer is even when his shoulder boards
aren‘t blue!

And if they are blue? If he has been indoctrinated to believe
that even among other officers he is the salt of the earth? And
that he knows more than others and is entrusted with more res—
