Arrest | 11

Gulag, all that excessive theatricality went out the window, and
the whole theory suffered greatly. All the fuss and feathers of
ritual went flying in every direction, and the arrest of tens of
thousands took on the appearance of a squalid roll call: they
stood there with lists, read off the names of those on one train,
loaded them onto another, and that was the whole arrest.

For several decades political arrests were distinguished in our
country precisely by the fact that people were arrested who were
guilty of nothing and were therefore unprepared to put up any
resistance whatsoever. There was a general feeling of being
destined for destruction, a sense of having nowhere to escape
from the GPU—NKVD (which, incidentally, given our internal
passport system, was quite accurate). And even in the fever of
epidemic arrests, when people leaving for work said farewell to
their families every day, because they could not be certain they
would return at night, even then almost no one tried to run away
and only in rare cases did people commit suicide. And that was
exactly what was required. A submissive sheep is a find for a wolf.

This submissiveness was also due to ignorance of the mech— _
anics of epidemic arrests. By and large, the Organs had no pro—
found reasons for their choice of whom to arrest and whom not
to arrest. They merely had over—all assignments, quotas for a
specific number of arrests. These quotas might be filled on an
orderly basis or wholly arbitrarily. In 1937 a woman came to
the reception room of the Novocherkassk NKVD to ask what
she should do about the unfed unweaned infant of a neighbor who
had been arrested. They said: "Sit down, we‘ll find out." She sat
there for two hours—whereupon they took her and tossed her
into a cell. They had a total plan which had to be fulfilled in a
hurry, and there was no one available to send out into the city
—and here was this woman already in their hands!

On the other hand, the NKVD did come to get the Latvian
Andrei Pavel near Orsha. But he didn‘t open the door; he jumped
out the window, escaped, and shot straight to Siberia. And even
though he lived under his own name, and it was clear from his
documents that he had come from Orsha, he was never arrested,
nor summoned to the Organs, nor subjected to any suspicion
whatsoever. After all, search for wanted persons falls into three
categories: All—Union, republican, and provincial. And the pur—
