The Interrogation | 119

conversations with C? And your conversations with D? No, you
think: "I forgot" is not the way out; you will be unable to
maintain that position. And your mind, still shocked by your
arrest, in the grip of fear, muddled by sleeplessness and hunger,
seeks a way out: how to play it shrewdly in a manner that will
have some verisimilitude and outsmart the interrogator.

What. about? It is fine if you talked about hockey—that,
friends, is in all cases the least troublesome! Or about women,
or even about science. Then you can repeat what was said.
(Science is not too far removed from hockey, but in our time
everything to do with science is classified information and they
may get you for a violation of the Decree on Revealing State
Secrets.) But what if you did in actual fact talk about the latest
arrests in the city? Or about the collective farms? (Of course,
critically—for who has anything good to say about them?) Or
about reducing the rate of pay for piecework? The fact remains
that you frowned for half an hour at the intersection—what
were you talking about there?

Maybe B has already been arrested. The interrogator assures
you that he has been, and that he has already given evidence
against you, and. that they are about to bring him in for a con—
frontation with you. Maybe he is sitting home very calmly and
quietly, but they might very well bring him in for questioning
and then they will find out from him what you were frowning
about for half an hour at that intersection.

At this point, too late, you have come to understand that,
because of the way life is, you and he ought to have reached an
agreement every time you parted and remembered clearly what
you were going to say if you were asked what you had talked
about that day) Then, regardless of interrogations, your testi—
mony and his would agree. But you had not made any such
agreement. You had unfortunately not understood what kind of
a jungle you lived in.

Should you say that you were talking about going on a fishing
trip? But then B might say that there was never any discussion
of fishing, that you talked about correspondence—school courses.
In that case, instead of causing the investigation to ease up a
bit, you would only tie the noose tighter: what about, what
about, what about?
