490 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

it, but it‘s invisible (and you can shut your eyes to it too). At
the big stations the loading and unloading of the dirty faces takes
place far, far from the passenger platform and is seen only by
switchmen and roadbed inspectors. At smaller stations a blind
alleyway between two warehouses is preferred, into which the
Black Marias can back so that their steps are flush with the
steps of the zak car. The convict doesn‘t have time to look at the
station, to see you, or to look up and down the train. He gets
to look only at the steps. (And sometimes the lower step is waist—
high, and he hasn‘t the strength to climb up on it.) And the con—
voy guards, who have blocked off the narrow crossing from the
Black Maria to the zak car, growl and snarl: "Quick, quick!
Come on, come on!" And maybe even brandish their bayonets.

And you, hurrying along the platform with your children,
your suitcases, and your string bags, are too busy to look closely:
Why is that second baggage car hitched onto the train? There
is no identification on it, and it is very much like a baggage car
—and the gratings have diagonal bars, and there is darkness
behind them. But then why are soldiers, defenders of the Father—
land, riding in it, and why, when the train stops, do two of them
march whistling along on either side and peer down under the
car?

The train starts—and a hundred crowded prisoner destinies,
tormented hearts, are borne along the same snaky rails, behind
the same smoke, past the same fields, posts, and haystacks as you,
and even a few seconds sooner than you. But outside your
window even less trace of the grief which has flashed past
is left in the air than fingers leave in water. And in the familiar
life of the train, which is always exactly the same—with its slit—
openable package of bed linen, and tea served in glasses with
metal holders—could you possibly grasp what a dark and sup—
pressed horror has been borne through the same sector of
Euclidean space just three seconds ahead of you? You are dis—
satisfied because there are four of you in your compartment and
it is crowded. And could you possibly believe—and will you
possibly believe when reading these lines—that in the same size
compartment as yours, but up ahead in that zak car, there are
fourteen people? And if there are twenty—five? And if there are
thirty?
