The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 91

from the West. It was fashionable to charge them with:
e VAT—Praise of American Technology;
e VAD—Praise of American Democracy; and
e PZ—Toadyism Toward the West.

These waves were not unlike those of 1937, but the sentences
were different. The standard sentence was no longer the patri—
archal ten—ruble bill, but the new Stalinist twenty—five. By now
the tenner was for juveniles.

There was a good—sized wave from the new Decree on Reveal—
ing State Secrets. (State secrets included such things as: the
district harvest; any figure on epidemics; the type of goods pro—
duced by any workshop or mini—factory; mention of a civil airport,
municipal transport routes, or the family name of any prisoner
imprisoned in any camp.) For violations of this decree they gave
fifteen years.

The waves of nationalities were not forgotten either. The
Ukrainian nationalists, the "Banderovtsy," taken in the heat of
struggle from the forests where they fought, kept flowing all this
time. Simultaneously, all West Ukrainian country people received
tenners and fivers in camps and exile—presumably for having
had connections with the partisans: someone had let them spend
the night; someone had once fed them; someone had not reported
them. For about a year, starting in 1950, a wave of wives of
Banderovtsy was under way. They gave them each ten years for
failure to make a denunciation—so as to finish off their husbands
faster.

By this time resistance in Lithuania and Estonia had already
come to an end. But in 1949 new waves of new "social prophy—
laxis" to assure collectivization kept coming. They took whole
trainloads of city dwellers and peasants from the three Baltic
republics into Siberian exile. (The historical rhythm was dis—
rupted in these republics: they were forced to recapitulate in
brief, limited periods the more extended experience of the rest
of the country.)

In 1948 one more nationalist wave went into exile—that of the
Greeks who inhabited the areas around the Sea of Azov, the
Kuban, and Sukhumi. They had done nothing to offend the
Father during the war, but now he avenged himself on them for
his failure in Greece, or so it seemed. This wave, too, was evi—
