392 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

So it was that the engineer was to blame for everything, even
when he had done nothing wrong. But if he actually had made
a real mistake, and after all he was a human being, he would be
torn to pieces unless his colleagues could manage to cover things
up. For would they value honesty? So the engineers then were
forced at times to lie to the Party leadership?

To restore their authority and prestige, the engineers really
had to unite among themselves and help each other out. They
were all in danger. But they didn‘t need any kind of conference,
any membership cards, to achieve such unity. Like every kind
of mutual understanding between intelligent and clear—thinking
people, it was attained by a few quiet, even accidental words; no
kind of voting was called for. Only narrow minds need resolu—
tions and the Party stick. (And this was something Stalin could
never understand, nor could the interrogators, nor their whole
crowd. They had never had any experience of human relation—
ships of that kind. They had never seen anything like that in
Party history!) In any case, that sort of unity had long existed
among Russian engineers in their big illiterate nation of petty
tyrants. It had already been tested for several decades. But now
a new government had discovered it and become alarmed.

Then came 1927. And the rationality of the NEP period went
up in smoke. And it turned out that the entire NEP was merely
a cynical deceit. Extravagantly unrealistic projections of a super—
industrial forward leap had been announced; impossible plans
and tasks had been assigned. In those conditions, what was there
for the collective engineering intelligence to do—the engineering
leadership of the State Planning Commission and the Supreme
Council of the Economy? To submit to insanity? To stay on the
sidelines? It would have cost them nothing. One can write any
figures one pleases on a piece of paper. But "our comrades, our
colleagues in actual production, will not be able to fulfill these
assignments." And that meant it was necessary to try to intro—
duce some moderation into these plans, to bring them under the
control of reason, to eliminate entirely the most outrageous
assignments. To create, so to speak, their own State Planning
Commission of engineers in order to correct the stupidities of
the leaders. And the most amusing thing was that this was in
their interests—the interests of the leaders—too. And in the
interests of all industry and of all the people, since ruinous
