The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 65

why machines were breaking down, then dialectic sensitivity

brought agriculture, too, under its sway.)

Section 8 covered terror (not that terror from above for which
the Soviet Criminal Code was supposed to "provide a founda—
tion and basis in legality,""° but terrorism from below).

Terror was construed in a very broad sense, not simply a
matter of putting bombs under governors‘ carriages, but, for .
example, smashing in the face of a personal enemy if he was
an activist in the Party, the Komsomol, or the police/—that
was already terror. The murder of an activist, especially, was
always treated more seriously than the murder of an ordinary
person (as in the Code of Hammurabi in the eighteenth century
B.C.). If a husband killed his wife‘s lover, it was very fortunate
for him if the victim turned out not to be a Party member; he
would be sentenced under Article 136 as a common criminal,
who was a "social ally" and didn‘t require an armed escort. But
if the lover turned out to have been a Party member, the
husband became an enemy of the people, with a 58—8 sentence.

An even more important extension of the concept was at—
tained by interpreting Section 8 in terms of that same Article
19, i.e., intent in the sense of preparation, to include not only
a direct threat against an activist uttered near a beer hall
("Just you wait!") but also the quick—tempered retort of a
peasant woman at the market ("Oh, drop dead!"). Both
qualified as TN—Terrorist Intent—and provided a basis for
applying the article in all its severity."

Section 9 concerned destruction or damage by explosion or
arson (always with a counterrevolutionary purpose), for which
the abbreviated term was "diversion"—in other words, sabotage.

The expansion of this section was based on the fact that the
counterrevolutionary purpose could be discerned by the inter—
rogator, who knew best what was going on in the criminal‘s
mind. And every human error, failure, mistake at work or in
the production process, remained unforgiven, and was there—
fore considered to be a case of "diversion."

But there was no section in Article 58 which was interpreted
as broadly and with so ardent a revolutionary conscience as

30. Lenin, fifth edition, Vol. 45, p. 190.
31. This sounds like an exaggeration, a farce, but it was not I who invented
that farce. I was in prison with these individuals.
