110 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

Or else, during the interrogation itself, when the prisoner is
out in plain view, he can be forced to sit in this way: as far
forward as possible on the front edge ("Move further forward!
Further still!") of the chair so that he is under painful pressure
during the entire interrogation. He is not allowed to stir for
several hours. Is that all? Yes, that‘s all. Just try it yourself!

17. Depending on local conditions, a divisional pit can be
substituted for the box, as was done in the Gorokhovets army
camps during World War II. The prisoner was pushed into such
a pit, ten feet in depth, six and a half feet in diameter; and beneath
the open sky, rain or shine, this pit was for several days both his
cell and his latrine. And ten and a half ounces of bread, and
water, were lowered to him on a cord. Imagine yourself in this
situation just after you‘ve been arrested, when you‘re all in a
boil.

Either identical orders to all Special Branches of the Red
Army or else the similarities of their situations in the field led
to broad use of this method. Thus, in the 36th Motorized In—
fantry Division, a unit which took part in the battle of Khalkhin—
Gol, and which was encamped in the Mongolian desert in 1941,
a newly arrested prisoner was, without explanation, given a
spade by Chief of the Special Branch Samulyev and ordered to
dig a pit the exact dimensions of a grave. (Here is a hybridiza—
tion of physical and psychological methods.) When the prisoner
had dug deeper than his own waist, they ordered him to stop and
sit down on the bottom: his head was no longer visible. One
guard kept watch over several such pits and it was as though he
were surrounded by empty space."* They kept the accused in this
desert with no protection from the Mongolian sun and with no
warm clothing against the cold of the night, but no tortures—
why waste effort on tortures? The ration they gave was three and
a half ounces of bread per day and one glass of water. Lieutenant
Chulpenyev, a giant, a boxer, twenty—one years old, spent a
month imprisoned this way. Within ten days he was swarming
with lice. After fifteen days he was summoned to interrogation
for the first time.

13. This, evidently, is a Mongolian theme. In the magazine Niva (March 15,
1914, p. 218) there is a drawing of a Mongolian prison: each prisoner is shut

in a separate trunk with a small opening for his head or for food. A jailer
patrols between the trunks.
