The Ships of the Archipelago | 517

out because you didn‘t make use of the opportunity to ask him
questions. And the less you talk, the more you‘ll hear. Thin
strands of human lives stretch from island to island of the Archi—
pelago. They intertwine, touch one another for one night only
in just such a clickety—clacking half—dark car as this and then
separate once and for all. Put your ear to their quiet humming
and the steady clickety—clack beneath the car. After all, it is the
spinning wheel of life that is clicking and clacking away there. _ _

What strange stories you can hear! What things you will laugh
at.

Now that fast—moving little Frenchman over there near the
grating—why does he keep twisting around, what is he so sur—
prised at? Explain things to him! And you can ask him at the
same time how he happened to land here. So you‘ve found some—
one who knows French, and you learn that he is Max Santerre, a
French soldier. And he used to be just as alert and curious out
in freedom, in his douce France. They told him politely to stop
hanging around the transit point for Russian repatriates, but he
kept doing it anyway. And then the Russians invited him to have
a drink with them, and from a certain moment after that he
remembers nothing. He came to on the floor of an airplane to
find himself dressed in a Red Army man‘s field shirt and britches,
with the boots of a convoy guard looming over him. They told
him he was sentenced to ten years in camp, but that, of course, as
he very clearly understood, was just a nasty joke, wasn‘t it, and
everything would be cleared up? Oh, yes, it will be cleared up,
dear fellow; just wait.‘" Well, there was nothing to be surprised at
in such cases in 1945—1946.

That particular story was Franco—Russian, and here is one
which is Russo—French. But no, really just pure Russian, be—
cause no one but a Russian would play this kind of trick! Through—
out our history there have been people who just couldn‘t be con—
tained, like Menshikov in Berezovo in Surikov‘s painting. Now
take Ivan Koverchenko, average height, wiry, and yet he couldn‘t
be contained either. Because he was a stalwart fellow with a
healthy countenance—but the devil threw in a bit of vodka for
good measure. He would talk about himself quite willingly and

12. Ahead of him lay another sentence—for twenty—five years—that he was
given in camp, and he would not get out of Ozerlag until 1957.
