The Law Becomes a Man | 359

belligerency against the Bolsheviks on the sole stipulation that
they would not continue the struggle into the future.
c. And they had not continued the struggle since that time.
d. And it was now 1922!

How could Krylenko get around that one?

Some thought had been given to this point. When the Socialist
International asked the Soviet government to drop charges and
not put its socialist brothers on trial, some thought had been
given to it.

In fact, at the beginning of 1919, in the face of threats from
Kolchak and Denikin, the SR‘s had renounced their task of revolt
against the Bolsheviks and had abandoned all armed struggle
against them. (And to aid their Communist brethren, the Samara
SR‘s had even opened up a section of the Kolchak front . . . which
was, in fact, why the amnesty had been granted.) And right at the
trial the defendant Gendelman, a member of the Central Com—
mittee, said: "Give us the chance to make use of the whole gamut
of so—called civil liberties, and we will not break the law." (Give
it to them! The "whole gamut," to boot! What loud—mouths!)

And it wasn‘t just that they weren‘t engaged in any opposition:
they had recognized the Soviet government! In other words, they
had renounced their former Provisional Government, yes, and the
Constituent Assembly as well. And all they asked was a new
election for the soviets, with freedom for all parties to engage in
electoral campaigning.

Now did you hear that? Did you hear that? That‘s where the
hostile bourgeois beast poked his snout through. How could we?
After all, this is a time of crisis! After all, we are encircled by the
enemy. (And in twenty years‘ time, and fifty years‘ time, and a
hundred years‘ time, for that matter, it will be exactly the same.)
And you want freedom for the parties to engage in electoral cam—
paigning, you bastards?

Politically sober people, said Krylenko, could only laugh in
reply and shrug their shoulders. It had been a just decision "im—
mediately and by all measures of state suppression to prevent
these groups from conducting propaganda against the govern—
ment.""" And specifically: in reply to the renunciation by the
SR‘s of armed opposition and to their peaceful proposals, they

22. Krylenko, op. cit., p. 183.
