584 | THE GULAG ARCHIPEL AGO

tion? Well, in Minusinsk in 194—, after the prisoners hadn‘t been
taken into the fresh air for a whole year, they had forgotten how
to walk, to breathe, to look at the light. And then they took them
out, put them in formation, and drove them the fifteen miles to
Abakan on foot. About a dozen of them died along the way. And
no one is ever going to write a great novel about it, not even one
chapter: if you live in a graveyard, you can‘t weep for everyone.

A prisoner transport on foot—that was the grandfather of
prisoner transport by rail, of the Stolypin car, and of the red
cattle cars too. In our time it is used less and less, and only where
mechanical transportation is still impossible. Thus in one sector
of Lake Ladoga, the prisoners were sent on foot from besieged
Leningrad to the red cars, nicknamed "red cows." They led the
women together with the German POW‘s, and used bayonets to
keep our men away from them so they couldn‘t take their bread.
Those who fell by the wayside were immediately tossed up into
a truck alive or dead, after their shoes were removed. And in
the thirties, each day they sent off on foot from the Kotlas Transit
Prison to Ust—Vym (about 185 miles) and sometimes to Chibyu
(more than 300 miles) a transport of a hundred prisoners.
Once in 1938 they sent off a women‘s prisoner transport the same
way. These transports covered 15 miles a day. The convoy
marched along with one or two dogs, and those who fell behind
were urged on with gunstocks. True, the prisoners‘ possessions
as well as the cooking pot and the food brought up the rear in
carts, and this transport thus recalled the classic prisoner trans—
ports of the past century. There were also prisoner—transport huts
—the ruined houses of liquidated kulaks, with windows broken
and doors ripped off. The accounting office of the Kotlas Transit
Prison had issued provisions to the transport based on a theoreti—
cal estimate of the time the journey would take, provided nothing
went wrong on the way, without allowing for even one extra day.
(The basic principle of all our accounting.) Whenever delays
occurred en route, they had to stretch out the provisions, and
fed the prisoners a mash of rye flour without salt and sometimes
nothing at all. In this respect they departed from the classic
model.

In 1940 Olenyev‘s prisoner transport, after disembarking from
the barge, was herded on foot through the taiga (from Knyazh—
