The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 43

in other cities. In Rostov—on—the—Don during those days the floor
was so crowded in the cellar of House 33 that the newly arrived
Boiko could hardly find a place to sit down.)

A typical example from this wave: Several dozen young people
got together for some kind of musical evening which had not been
authorized ahead of time by the GPU. They listened to music and
then drank tea. They got the money for the tea by voluntarily
contributing their own kopecks. It was quite clear, of course,
that this music was a cover for counterrevolutionary sentiments,
and that the money was being collected not for tea but to assist
the dying world bourgeoisie. And they were all arrested and given
from three to ten years—Anna Skripnikova getting five, while
Ivan Nikolayevich Varentsov and the other organizers of the
affair who refused to confess were shot!

And in that same year, somewhere in Paris, a group of Russian
émigré Lycée graduates gathered to celebrate the traditional
Pushkin holiday. A report of this was published in the papers. It
was clearly an intrigue on the part of mortally wounded imperial—
ism, and as a result all Lycée graduates still left in the U.S.S.R.
were arrested, as were the so—called "law students" (graduates of
another such privileged special school of prerevolutionary Rus—
sia).

Only the size of SLON—the Solovetsky Special Purpose
Camp—limited for the time being the scale of the Voikov draft.
But the Gulag Archipelago had already begun its malignant life
and would shortly metastasize throughout the whole body of the
nation.

A new taste had been acquired and a new appetite began to
grow. The time had long since arrived to crush the technical intel—
ligentsia, which had come to regard itself as too irreplaceable and
had not gotten used to catching instructions on the wing.

In other words, we never did trust the engineers—and from
the very first years of the Revolution we saw to it that those
lackeys and servants of former capitalist bosses were kept in line
by healthy suspicion and surveillance by the workers. However,
during the reconstruction period, we did permit them to work in
our industries, while the whole force of the class assault was
directed against the rest of the intelligentsia. But the more our own
economic leadership matured—in VSNKh (the Supreme Council
