The Ships of the Archipelago | 527

jouncing as you go, knocking into things, you trudge all the way
through the city to the prison itself.

There is one more command which is a caricature of geese:
"Take hold of your heels!" This meant that anyone whose hands
were free had to grab both his legs at about ankle height. And
now: "Forward march." (Well, now, reader, put this book aside,
try going around the room that way! How does it work? And
at what speed? How much looking around could you do? And
what about escaping?) Picture the way three or four dozen such
geese look from the side. (Kiev, 1940.)

And it is not necessarily August out; it might be December,
1946, and, there being no Black Maria, you are being herded
at 40 degrees below zero to the Petropavlovsk Transit Prison.
And it is easy to guess that during the last hours before arriv—
ing the Stolypin convoy refused to go to the trouble of taking
you to the toilet, so as to avoid getting it dirty. Weakened from
interrogation, gripped by the cold, you have a very hard time
holding it—women especially. Well, and so what! It‘s for horses
to stand stock—still and loose the floodgates! It‘s for dogs to
go lift a leg against a fence. But as for people, you can do it
right there, while you keep moving. No need to be shy in your
own fatherland. It will dry at the transit prison. . . . Vera
Korneyeva stooped down to adjust her shoe and fell one step
behind, and the convoy immediately set the police dog on her
and the dog bit her in the buttocks through all her winter
clothing. Don‘t fall behind! And an Uzbek fell down, and they
beat him with their gunstocks and jackboots.

Well, that‘s no tragedy: it won‘t be photographed for the
Daily Express. And the chief of convoy will live to a ripe old age
and never be tried by anyone.

And the Black Marias, too, came down to us from history. In
what respect does the prison carriage described by Balzac differ
from a Black Maria? Only that the prison carriage was drawn
along more slowly, and prisoners weren‘t packed so tightly.
True, in the twenties columns of prisoners were still being
driven afoot through our cities, even Leningrad. They brought
