274 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

In the middle of July, the corridor jailer sent one old man from
our cell to wash down the toilet, and while they were there eye to
eye—for he wouldn‘t have dared in the presence of witnesses—
he looked sympathetically at the prisoner‘s gray head and asked:
"What‘s your article, father?" "Fifty—eight!" The old man lit up.
At home three generations were mourning his arrest. "You‘re not
included," sighed the jailer. Nonsense, we decided. in the cell:
just an illiterate jailer.

There was also a young man from Kiev in the cell, Valentin.
I can‘t remember his family name. He had big eyes that were
beautiful in a feminine way, and he was terrified by the interroga—
tion. There is no doubt that he had the gift of precognition—per—
haps only in his then current state of excitement. More than once,
he went around the cell in the morning and pointed: Today they
are going to come for you and you. I saw it in my dream. And
they came and got them . . . the very individuals he had pointed
out. One might add that a prisoner‘s heart is so inclined toward
mysticism that he accepts: precognition almost without surprise.

On July 27 Valentin came up to me: "Aleksandr! Today it is
our turn." And he told me a dream that had all the characteristics
of prison dreams: a bridge across a muddy stream, a cross. I
began to get my things together. And it was not for nothing
either. He and I were summoned after morning tea. Our cellmates
saw us off with noisy good wishes, and many of them assured us
we were going off to freedom. They had figured it out by compar—
ing our less serious cases.

Perhaps you honestly don‘t believe it. Perhaps you won‘t allow
yourself to believe. You can try to brush it aside with jokes. But
flaming pincers, hotter than anything else on earth, suddenly close
around your heart. They just do. Suppose it‘s true?

They assembled twenty of us from various cells and took us to
the baths first. Before every big change in his life, the prisoner
has first of all to take a bath. We had time enough there, an hour
and a half, to exchange our hunches and ideas. At that point, all
steamed up, our skins tender, we were taken through the little
emerald park in the Butyrki‘s interior courtyard, where the birds
sang deafeningly, although they were probably only sparrows,
and the green of the trees seemed unbearably bright to eyes no
longer used to it. Never had my eyes seen the green of the leaves
