130 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

so despicably as the leading Bolsheviks when the lightning struck
them. If you study in detail the whole history of the arrests and
trials of 1936 to 1938, the principal revulsion you feel is not
against Stalin and his accomplices, but against the humiliatingly
repulsive defendants—nausea at théir spiritual baseness after
their former pride and implacability.

So what is the answer? How can you stand your ground when
you are weak and sensitive to pain, when people you love are
still alive, when you are unprepared?

What do you need to make you stronger than the interrogator
and the whole trap?

From the moment you go to prison you must put your cozy
past firmly behind you. At the very threshold, you must say to
yourself: "My life is over, a little early to be sure, but there‘s
nothing to be done about it. I shall never return to freedom. I am
condemned to die—now or a little later. But later on, in truth,
it will be even harder, and so the sooner the better. I no longer
have any property whatsoever. For me those I love have died, and
for them I have died. From today on, my body is useless and
alien to me. Only my spirit and my conscience remain precious
and important to me.‘ «

Confronted by such a prisoner, the 1nterrogatlon w111 tremble.

Only the man who has renounced everything can win that
victory.

But how can one turn one‘s body to stone?

Well, they managed to turn some individuals from the Berd—
yayev circle into puppets for a trial, but they didn‘t succeed with
Berdyayev. They wanted to drag him into an open trial; they
arrested him twice; and (in 1922) he was subjected to a night
interrogation by Dzerzhinsky himself. Kamenev was there too
(which means that he, too, was not averse to using the Cheka
in an ideological conflict). But Berdyayev did not humiliate him—
self. He did not beg or plead. He set forth firmly those religious
and moral principles which had led him to refuse to accept the
political authority established in Russia. And not only did they
come to the conclusion that he would be useless for a trial, but
they liberated him.
