The Ships of the Archipelago | 523

"The gendarmes! The gendarmes!" the prisoners cried out hap—
pily. They were happy that they would be escorted the rest
of the way by the attentive gendarmes and not by the convoy.

Once again I have forgotten to insert quotation marks. That
was Korolenko who was telling us this."" We, it is true, were not
happy to see the bluecaps. But anyone who ever got caught in
what the prisoners christened the pendulum would have been
glad to see even them.

An ordinary passenger might have a difficult time boarding
a train at a small way station—but not getting off. Toss your
things out and jump off. This was not the case with a prisoner,
however. If the local prison guard or police didn‘t come for him
or was late by even two minutes, toot—toot, the whistle would
blow, and the train would get under way, and they would take
the poor sinner of a prisoner all the way to the next transit point.
And it was all right if it was actually a transit point that they
took you to, because they would begin to feed you again there.
But sometimes it was all the way to the end of the Stolypin‘s
route, and then they would keep you for eighteen hours in an
empty car and take you back with a whole new group of
prisoners, and then once again, maybe, they wouldn‘t come for
you—and once again you‘d be in a blind alley, and once again
you‘d wait there and during all that time they wouldn‘t feed you.
Your rations, after all, were issued only until your first stop,
and the accounting office isn‘t to blame that the prison messed
things up, for you are, after all, listed for Tulun. And the con—
voy isn‘t responsible for feeding you out of its own rations. So
they swing you back and forth six ftimes (it has actually
happened!): Irkutsk to Krasnoyarsk, Krasnoyarsk to Irkutsk,
Irkutsk to Krasnoyarsk, etc., etc., etc., and when you do see a
blue visor on the Tulun platform, you are ready to throw your
arms around him: Thank you, beloved, for saving me.

You get so worn down, so choked, so shattered in a Stolypin,
even in two days‘ time, that before you get to a big city you

13. V. G. Korolenko, Istoriya Moyego Sovremennika (A History of My
Contemporary), Moscow, 1955, Vol. III, p. 166.
