94 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

mid—eighteenth century, what had already become totally impos—
sible under Catherine the Great, was all being practiced during
the flowering of the glorious twentieth century—in a society based
on socialist principles, and at a time when airplanes were flying
and the radio and talking films had already appeared—not by one
scoundrel alone in one secret place only, but by tens of thousands
of specially trained human beasts standing over millions of de—
fenseless victims. .

Was it only that explosion of atavism which is now evasively
called "the cult of personality" that was so horrible? Or was it
even more horrible that during those same years, in 1937 itself,
we celebrated Pushkin‘s centennial? And that we shamelessly
continued to stage those self—same Chekhov plays, even though
the answers to them had already come in? Is it not still more
dreadful that we are now being told, thirty years later, "Don‘t
talk about it!"? If we start to recall the sufferings of millions, we
are told it will distort the historical perspective! If we doggedly
seek out the essence of our morality, we are told it will darken
our material progress! Let‘s think rather about the blast furnaces,
the rolling mills that were built, the canals that were dug . . . no,
better not talk about the canals. . . . Then maybe about the gold
of the Kolyma? No, maybe we ought not to talk about that
either. . . . Well, we can talk about anything, so long as we do it
adroitly, so long as we glorify it. . . .

It is really hard to see why we condemn the Inquisition. Wasn‘t
it true that beside the autos—da—fé, magnificent services were
offered the Almighty? It is hard to see why we are so down on
serfdom. After all, no one forbade the peasants to work every
day. And they could sing carols at Christmas too. And for Trinity
Day the girls wove wreaths. .

The exceptional character which written and oral legend now—
adays assigns to the year 1937 is seen in the creation of fabri—
cated charges and tortures. But this is untrue, wrong. Throughout
the years and decades, interrogations under Article 58 were al—
most never undertaken to elicit the truth, but were simply an
exercise in an inevitably filthy procedure: someone who had been
