342 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

In the two trials following we will take leave of our favorite
supreme accuser for a while: he is occupied with his preparations
for the major trial of the SR‘s."" This spectacular trial aroused a
great deal of emotion in Europe beforehand, and the People‘s
Commissariat of Justice was suddenly taken aback: after all, we
had been trying people for four years without any code, neither
a new one nor an old one. And in all probability Krylenko him—
self was concerned about the code too. Everything had to be
neatly tied up ahead of time.

The coming church trials were internal. They didn‘t interest
progressive Europe. And they could be conducted without a code.

We have already had an opportunity to observe that the separa—
tion of church and state was so construed by the state that the
churches themselves and everything that hung in them, was in—
stalled in them and painted in them, belonged to the state, and
the only church remaining was that church which, in accordance
with the Scriptures, lay within the heart. And in 1918, when
political victory seemed to have been attained faster and more
easily than had been expected, they had pressed right on to con—
fiscate church property. However, this leap had aroused too
fierce a wave of popular indignation. In the heat of the Civil
War, it was not very intelligent to create, in addition, an internal
front against the believers. And it proved necessary to postpone
for the time being the dialogue between the Communists and the
Christians.

At the end of the Civil War, and as its natural consequence,
an unprecedented famine developed in the Volga area. They give
it only two lines in the official histories because it doesn‘t add a
very ornamental touch to the wreaths of the victors in that war.
But the famine existed nonetheless—to the point of cannibalism,
to the point at which parents ate their own children—such a
famine as even Russia had never known, even in the Time of
Troubles in the early seventeenth century. (Because at that time,
as the historians testify, unthreshed ricks of grain survived intact

10. The provincial trials of the SR‘s took place even earlier, such as the
one in Saratov in 1919.
