First Cell, First Love | 181

to it; and, above all, that interminable irritating roar from the
wind tunnel of the neighboring Central Aero— and Hydrodynamics
Institute—a roar one could not believe was unintentional, a roar
which would make a bow! or cup vibrate so violently that it would
slip off the edge of the table, a roar which made it useless to
converse and during which one could sing at the top of one‘s
lungs and the jailer wouldn‘t even hear. And then when the roar
stopped, there would ensue a sense of relief and felicity superior
to freedom itself.

But it was not the dirty floor, nor the murky walls, nor the
odor of the latrine bucket that you loved—but those fellow
prisoners with whom you about—faced at command, and that
something which beat between your heart and theirs, and their
sometimes astonishing words, and then, too, the birth within you,
on that very spot, of free—floating thoughts you had so recently
been unable to leap up or rise to.

And how much it had cost you to last out until that first cell!
You had been kept in a pit, or in a box, or in a cellar. No one
had addressed a human word to you. No one had looked at you
with a human gaze. All they did was to peck at your brain and
heart with iron beaks, and when you cried out or groaned, they
laughed.

For a week or a month you had been an abandoned waif, alone
among enemies, and you had already said good—bye to reason
and to life; and you had already tried to kill yourself by "falling"
from the radiator in such a way as to smash your brains against
the iron cone of the valve." Then all of a sudden you were alive
again, and were brought in to your friends. And reason returned
to you.

That‘s what your first cell is!

You waited for that cell. You dreamed of it almost as eagerly
as of freedom. Meanwhile, they kept shoving you around between
cracks in the wall and holes in the ground, from Lefortovo into
some legendary, diabolical Sukhanovka.

Sukhanovka was the most terrible prison the MGB had. Its
very name was used to intimidate prisoners; interrogators would
hiss it threateningly. And you‘d not be able to question those who
had been there: either they were insane and talking only discon—
nected nonsense, or they were dead.

2. Alexander D.
