The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 77

those same years and via those same sections of the boundless
Article 58. Well, who in 1940 noticed the wave of wives arrested
for failure to renounce their husbands? And who in Tambov re—
members that during that year of peace they arrested an entire
jazz orchestra playing at the "Modern" Cinema Theatre because
they all turned out to be enemies of the people? And who noticed
the thirty thousand Czechs who in 1939 fled from occupied
Czechoslovakia to their Slavic kinfolk in the U.S.S.R.? It was
impossible to guarantee that a single one of them was not a spy.
They sent them all off to northern camps. (And it was out of
those camps that the "Czechoslovak Corps" materialized during
the war.) And was it not, indeed, in 1939 that we reached out our
helping hands to the West Ukrainians and the West Byelorussians,
and, in 1940, to the Baltic states and to the Moldavians? It turned
out that our brothers badly needed to be purged, and from them,
too, flowed waves of social prophylaxis. They took those who
were too independent, too influential, along with those who were
too well—to—do, too intelligent, too noteworthy; they took, par—
ticularly, many Poles from former Polish provinces. (It was then
that ill—fated Katyn was filled up; and then, too, that in the north—
ern camps they stockpiled fodder for the future army of Sikorski
and Anders.) They arrested officers everywhere. Thus the
population was shaken up, forced into silence, and left with—
out any possible leaders of resistance. Thus it was that wisdom
was instilled, that former ties and former friendships were cut
off.

Finland ceded its isthmus to us with zero population. Never—
theless, the removal and resettlement of all persons with Finnish
blood took place throughout Soviet Karelia and in Leningrad in
1940. We didn‘t notice that wavelet: we have no Finnish blood.

In the Finnish War we undertook our first experiment in con—
victing our war prisoners as traitors to the Motherland. The first
such experiment in human history; and would you believe it?—
we didn‘t notice!

That was the rehearsal—just at that moment the war burst
upon us. And with it a massive retreat. It was essential to evacuate
swiftly everyone who could be got out of the western republics
that were being abandoned to the enemy. In the rush, entire mili—
tary units—regiments, antiaircraft and artillery batteries—were
left behind intact in Lithuania. But they still managed to get out
