The Law as a Child | 303

adorn the colored pages of the official History of the Civil War,
and even though no one photographed them, and no one filmed
motion pictures of those furious crowds attacking machine guns
with clubs, pitchforks, and axes and, later, lined up for execution
with their arms tied behind their backs—ten for one! The revolt
in Sapozhok is remembered only in Sapozhok; the one in Pitelino
only in Pitelino. We learn from Latsis the number of peasant
rebellions that were suppressed during that same year and a half
in twenty provinces—344.° (From 1918 on, peasant revolts were
already being called "kulak" revolts, for how could the peasants
revolt against the workers‘ and peasants‘ power! But how then
could one explain that in every instance it was not just three
peasant huts that revolted but the whole village? Why did the
masses of poor peasants not kill the insurgent "kulaks" with those
same pitchforks and axes, instead of marching with them against
the machine guns? Latsis claims: "The kulaks compelled the
rest of the peasants to take part in these revolts by promises,
slander, and threats.""" But what could have been more laden
with promises than the slogans of the Committees of the Poor?
And what could have been more loaded with threats than the
machine guns of the Special Purpose Detachments, the CHON?

And how many wholly random people, completely random,
whose destruction inevitably accounts for half the casualties of
every real, shooting revolution, were caught between those mill—
stones?

Here is an eyewitness description of a session of the Ryazan
Revtribunal which met in 1919 to hear the case of the Tolstoyan
I. Ye v. '

With the proclamation of universal and compulsory conscrip—
tion into the Red Army (just one year after the slogans: "Down
with the war!"; "Stick your bayonets in the ground!"; "Go
home!"), "54,697 deserters were caught and sent to the front" by
September, 1919, in Ryazan Province alone." (And how many
others were shot on the spot as examples?) Ye v was not a
deserter at all but a man who simply and openly refused to enter
military service because of his religious convictions. He was con—

 

 

9. Latsis, op. cit., p .75
10. Ibid., p. 70.
11. Ibid., p. 74.
