198 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

being driven in whole herds into Gulag. It was urgently necessary
for those in power to produce their own engineers—politically—
conscious, loyal, one—hundred percenters, who were to become
bigwigs of production, Soviet businessmen, in fact, rather than
people who did things themselves. That was the moment when
the famous commanding heights overlooking the as—yet—uncreated
industries were empty. And it was the fate of Z———v‘s class in
the Industrial Academy to occupy them.

Z———v‘s life became a chain of triumphs, a garland wind—
ing right up to the peak. Those were the exhausting years, from
1929 to 1933, when the civil war was being waged, not as in
1918 to 1920 with tachankas—machine guns mounted on horse—
drawn carts—but with police dogs, when the long lines of those
dying of famine trudged toward the railroad stations in the hope
of getting to the cities, which was where the breadgrains were
evidently ripening, but were refused tickets and were unable to
leave—and lay dying beneath the station fences in a submissive
human heap of homespun coats and bark shoes. In those same
years Z———v not only did not know that bread was rationed to
city dwellers but, at a time when a manual laborer was receiving
60 rubles a month in wages, he enjoyed a student‘s scholarship
of 900 rubles a month. Z———v‘s heart did not ache for the
countryside whose dust he had shaken from his feet. His new life
was already soaring elsewhere among the victors and the leaders.

He never had time to be an ordinary, run—of—the—mill foreman.
He was immediately assigned to a position in which he had
dozens of engineers and thousands of workers under him. He was
the chief engineer of the big construction projects outside Mos—
cow. From the very beginning of the war he, of course, had an
exemption from military service. He was evacuated to Alma—Ata,
together with the department he worked for, and in this area he
bossed even bigger construction projects on the Ili River. But
in this case his workers were prisoners. The sight of those little
gray people bothered him very little at the time, nor did it in—
spire him to any reappraisals nor compel him to take a closer
look. In that gleaming orbit in which he circled, the only im—
portant thing was to achieve the projected totals, fulfillment of
the plan. And it was quite enough for Z———v merely to punish
a particular construction unit, a particular camp, and a par—
