238 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

Not only war prisoners passed through those cells. A wave of
those who had spent any time in Europe was rolling too:
émigrés from the Civil War; the. "ostovtsy"—workers recruited
as laborers by the Germans during World War II; Red Army
officers who had been too astute and farsighted in their con—
clusions, so that Stalin feared they might bring European free—
dom back from their European crusade, like the Decembrists
120 years before. And yet it was the war prisoners who consti—
tuted the bulk of the wave. And among the war prisoners of
various ages, most were of my own age—not precisely my age,
but the twins of October, those born along with the Revolution,
who in 1937 had poured forth undismayed to celebrate the
twentieth anniversary of the Revolution, and whose age group, at
the beginning of the war, made up the standing army—which
had been scattered in a matter of weeks.

That tedious prison spring had, to the tune of the victory
marches, become the spring of reckoning for my whole genera—
tion.

Over our cradles the rallying cry had resounded: "All power
to the Soviets!" It was we who had reached out our suntanned
childish hands to clutch the Pioneers‘ bugle, and who in response
to the Pioneer challenge, "Be prepared," had saluted and an—
swered: "We are always prepared!" It was we who had smuggled
weapons into Buchenwald and joined the Communist Party there.
And it was we who were now in disgrace, only because we had
survived.‘

Back when the Red Army had cut through East Prussia, I
had seen downcast columns of returning war prisoners—the only
people around who were grieving instead of celebrating. Even
then their gloom had shocked me, though I didn‘t yet grasp the
reason for it. I jumped down and went over to those voluntarily
formed—up columns. (Why were they marching in columns? Why
had they lined themselves up in ranks? After all, no one had
compelled them to, and the war prisoners of all other nations
went home as scattered individuals. But ours wanted to return as
submissively as possible.) I was wearing a captain‘s shoulder

1. Those prisoners who had been in Buchenwald and survived were, in fact,
imprisoned for that very reason in our own camps: How could you have sur—
vived an annihilation camp? Something doesn‘t smell right!
