26 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

of millions of arrested persons are given equal attention with
ordinary streamlets of unremarkable handfuls, is quite incom—
plete, meager, miserly, and limited by my own capacity to pene—
trate the past. What is really needed is a great deal of additional
work by survivors familiar with the material.

In compiling this list the most difficult thing is to begin, partly
because the further back into the decades one goes, the fewer the
eyewitnesses who are left, and therefore the light of common
knowledge has gone out and darkness has set in, and the written
chronicles either do not exist or are kept under lock and key.
Also, it is not entirely fair to consider in a single category the
especially brutal years of the Civil War and the first years of
peacetime, when mercy might have been expected.

But even before there was any Civil War, it could be seen that
Russia, due to the makeup of its population, was obviously not
suited for any sort of socialism whatsoever. It was totally
polluted. One of the first blows of the dictatorship was directed
against the Cadets—the members of the Constitutional Demo—
cratic Party. (Under the Tsar they had constituted the most
dangerous ranks of revolution, and under the government of the
proletariat they represented the most dangerous ranks of re—
action.) At the end of November, 1917, on the occasion of the
first scheduled convening of the Constituent Assembly, which
did not take place, the Cadet Party was outlawed and arrests of
its members began. At about the same time, people associated
with the "Alliance for the Constituent Assembly" and the students
enrolled in the "soldiers‘ universities" were being thrown in the jug.

Knowing the sense and spirit of the Revolution, it is easy to
guess that during these months such central prisons as Kresty in
Petrograd and the Butyrki in Moscow, and many provincial
prisons like them, were filled with wealthy men, prominent
public figures, generals and officers, as well as officials of minis—
tries and of the state apparatus who refused to carry out the
orders of the new authority. One of the first operations of the
Cheka was to arrest the entire committee of the All—Russian
Union of Employees.
