The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 85

children where they were. It is true that they did not take every—
one, but they took all those who, in the course of twenty—five
years, had expressed even the mildest political views, or who had
expressed them earlier, during the Revolution. They did not touch
those who had lived a purely vegetable existence. The main waves
came from Bulgaria, Yugoslavia, and Czechoslovakia; there were
fewer from Austria and Germany. In the other countries of
Eastern Europe, there were hardly any Russians.

As if in response to 1945, a wave of émigrés poured from
Manchuria too. (Some of them were not arrested immediately.
Entire families were encouraged to return to the homeland as free
persons, but once back in Russia they were separated and sent
into exile or taken to prison. )

All during 1945 and 1946 a big wave of genuine, at—long—last,
enemies of the Soviet government flowed into the Archipelago.
(These were the Vlasov men, the Krasnov Cossacks, and Moslems
from the national units created under Hitler.) Some of them had
acted out of conviction; others had been merely involuntary par—
ticipants.

Along with them were seized not less than one million fugitives
from the Soviet government—civilians of all ages and of both
sexes who had been fortunate enough to find shelter on Allied
territory, but who in 1946—1947 were perfidiously returned by
Allied authorities into Soviet hands.*

45. It is surprising that in the West, where political secrets cannot be kept
long, since they inevitably come out in print or are disclosed, the secret of this
particular act of betrayal has been very well and carefully kept by the British
and American governments. This is truly the last secret, or one of the last,
of the Second World War. Having often encountered these people in camps,
I was unable to believe for a whole quarter—century that the public in the
West knew nothing of this action of the Western governments, this massive
handing over of ordinary Russian people to retribution and death. Not until
1973—in the Sunday Oklahoman of January 21—was an article by Julius
Epstein published. And I am here going to be so bold as to express gratitude
on behalf of the mass of those who perished and those few left alive. One
random little document was published from the many volumes of the hitherto
concealed case history of forced repatriation to the Soviet Union. "After hav—
ing remained unmolested in British hands for two years, they had allowed
themselves to be lulled into a false sense of security and they were therefore
taken completely by surprise. . . . They did not realize they were being re—
patriated. . . . They were mainly simple peasants with bitter personal grievances
against the Bolsheviks." The English authorities gave them the treatment
"reserved in the case of every other nation for war criminals alone: that of
being handed over against their will to captors who, incidentally, were not
expected to give them a fair trial." They were all sent to destruction on the
Archipelago. (Author‘s note, dated 1973.)
