First Cell, First Love | 197

was even younger than he appeared. He would be thirty—six that
year—"If they don‘t shoot me." Even more surprisingly, it de—
veloped that he was not a general at all, not even a colonel, and
not even a military man—but an engineer!

An engineer? I had grown up among engineers, and I could
remember the engineers of the twenties very well indeed: their
open, shining intellects, their free and gentle humor, their agility
and breadth of thought, the ease with which they shifted from
one engineering field to another, and, for that matter, from
technology to social concerns and art. Then, too, they personified
good manners and delicacy of taste; well—bred speech that flowed
evenly and was free of uncultured words; one of them might
play a musical instrument, another dabble in painting; and their
faces always bore a spiritual imprint.

From the beginning of the thirties I had lost contact with
that milieu. Then came the war. And here before me stood—an
engineer, one of those who had replaced those destroyed.

No one could deny him one point of superiotrity. He was much
stronger, more visceral, than those others had been. His shoulders
and hands retained their strength even though they had not
needed it for a long time. Freed from the restraints of courtesy,
he stared sternly and spoke impersonally, as if he didn‘t even
consider the possibility of a dissenting view. He had grown up
differently from those others too, and he worked differently.

His father had plowed the earth in the most literal sense.
Lenya Z———v had been one of those disheveled, unenlightened
peasant boys whose wasted talents so distressed Belinsky and
Tolstoi. He was certainly no Lomonosov, and he could never
have gotten to the Academy on his own, but he was talented. If
there had been no revolution, he would have plowed the land,
and he would have become well—to—do because he was energetic
and active, and he might have raised himself into the merchant
class.

It being the Soviet period, however, he entered the Komsomol,
and his work in the Komsomol, overshadowing his other talents,
lifted him out of anonymity, out of his lowly state, out of the
countryside, and shot him like a rocket through the Workers‘
School right into the Industrial Academy. He arrived there in
1929—at the very moment when those other engineers were
