386 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

So, all right, there hadn‘t been any intervention, but there
was, at least, a Promparty! Do you hear the tramp of marching
feet? Do you hear the murmur of the working masses: "Death!
Death! Death!"? And the marchers were "those who in the event
of war would have to atone with their deaths, and deprivations
and sufferings, for the work of these men."*

(And it was as if he had looked into a crystal ball: it was in—
deed with their deaths, and deprivations and sufferings, that those
trusting demonstrators would atone in 1941 for the work . . .
of these men! But where is your finger pointing, prosecutor? At
whom is your finger pointing?)

So then—why was it the Industrial Party? Why a party and
not an Engineering—Technical Center? We are accustomed to
having a Center!

Yes, there was a Center too. But they had decided to reorganize
themselves into a party. It was more respectable. That way it
would be easier to fight over cabinet posts in the future govern—
ment. It would "mobilize the engineering—technical masses for
the struggle for power." And whom would they be struggling
against? Other parties, of course. Against the Working Peasants
Party—the TKP—in the first place, for after all they had 200,000
members! Against the Menshevik Party in the second place! And
as for a Center, those three parties together were to have con—
stituted a United Center. But the GPU had destroyed them. "And
it‘s a good thing they destroyed us." (All the defendants were
glad!)

(And it was flattering to Stalin to annihilate three more parties.
Would there have been any glory, indeed, in merely adding
another three "Centers" to his list?)

And having a party instead of a Center meant having another
Central Committee—yes, the Promparty‘s own Central Com—
mittee! True, there had not been any party conferences, nor
had there been any elections, not even one. Whoever wanted
to be on the Central Committee just joined up—five people all
told. They all made way for one another, and they all yielded the
post of chairman to one another too. There were no meetings—
either of the Central Committee (no one else would remember
this, but Ramzin would remember it very well indeed, and he

20. Ibid., p. 437.
