The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 37

administrative districts, metropolitans and bishops were arrested,
and, as always, in the wake of the big fish, followed shoals of
smaller fry: archpriests, monks, and deacons. These arrests were
not even reported in the press. They also arrested those who
refused to swear to support the "Living Church" "renewal"
movement.

Men of religion were an inevitable part of every annual
"catch," and their silver locks gleamed in every cell and in every
prisoner transport en route to the Solovetsky Islands.

From the early twenties on, arrests were also made among
groups of theosophists, mystics, spiritualists (Count Palen‘s
group used to keep official transcripts of its communications with
the spirit world.) Also, religious societies and philosophers of the
Berdyayev circle. The so—called "Eastern Catholics"—followers
of Vladimir Solovyev—were arrested and destroyed in passing,
as was the group of A. I. Abrikosova. And, of course, ordinary
Roman Catholics—Polish Catholic priests, etc.—were arrested,
too, as part of the normal course of events.

However, the root destruction of religion in the country, which
throughout the twenties and thirties was one of the most important
goals of the GPU—NKVD, could be realized only by mass arrests
of Orthodox believers. Monks and nuns, whose black habits had
been a distinctive feature of Old Russian life, were intensively
rounded up on every hand, placed under arrest, and sent into
exile. They arrested and sentenced active laymen. The circles kept
getting bigger, as they raked in ordinary believers as well, old
people, and particularly women, who were the most stubborn be—
lievers of all and who, for many long years to come, would be
called "nuns" in transit prisons and in camps.

True, they were supposedly being arrested and tried not for
their actual faith but for openly declaring their convictions and
for bringing up their children in the same spirit. As Tanya Khod—
kevich wrote:

You can pray freelyr
But just so God alone can hear.

(She received a ten—year sentence for these verses.) A person
convinced that he possessed spiritual truth was required to conceal
it from his own children! In the twenties the religious education of
