206 { THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

There was new activity in the corridor. A free—loader in a gray
smock—a husky young fellow who had certainly not been at the
front—brought a tray with our five bread rations and ten lumps
of sugar. Our cell stoolie hovered over them, even though we
would inevitably cast lots for them—which we did because every
least detail of this was important: the heel of the loaf, for instance,
and the number of smaller pieces needed to make the total weight
come out right, and how the crust adheres, or doesn‘t, to the
inside of the bread—and it was better that fate should decide.‘""
But the stoolie felt he just had to hold everything in his hands for
at least a second so that some bread and sugar molecules would
cling to his palms.

That pound of unrisen wet bread, with its swamplike sogginess
of texture, made half with potato flour, was our crutch and the
main event of the day. Life had begun! The day had begun—this
was when it began! And everyone had countless problems. Had
he allocated his bread ration wisely the day before? Should he
cut it with a thread? Or break it up greedily? Or slowly, quietly
nip off pieces one by one? Should he wait for tea or pile into it
right now? Should he leave some for dinner or finish it off at
lunch? And how much?

In addition to these wretched dilemmas, what wide—ranging
discussions and arguments went on (for our tongues had been
liberated and with bread we were once more men) provoked by
this one—pound chunk in our hand, consisting more of water than
of grain. (Incidentally, Fastenko explained that the workers of
Moscow were eating the very same bread at that time.) And, gen—
erally speaking, was there any real breadgrain in this bread at all?
And what additives were in it? (There was at least one person in
every cell who knew all about additives, for, after all, who hadn‘t
eaten them during these past decades?) Discussions and remi—
niscences began. About the white bread they had baked back in
the twenties—springy round loaves, like sponge cake inside, with
a buttery reddish—brown top crust and a bottom crust that still
had a trace of ash from the coals of the hearth—that bread had

15. Where indeed in our country did this casting of lots not happen? It was
the result of our universal and endless hunger. In the army, all rations were
divided up the same way. And the Germans, who could hear what was going
on from their trenches, teased us about it: "Who gets it? The political com—
missar!"
