The Ports of the Archipelago | 561

asleep or maybe not even asleep, but there was such a racket in
the cell and there was such a crowd at the swill trough in the door
that he couldn‘t make his way there and listen, while on the other
side of it in the corridor they were rapidly muttering a list of
names for a prisoner transport. Some of the names were shouted
from the door into the cell, but not Yevrashkin‘s because hardly
had the name been read out in the corridor than an urka, a thief,
had obsequiously (and they can be obsequious when it‘s neces—
sary) shoved up his snout and answered quickly and quietly:
"Vasily Parfenych, born 1913, village of Semidubye, 109, one
year," and ran off to get his things. The real Yevrashkin yawned,
lay back on his bunk, and patiently waited to be called the next
day, and the next week, and the next month, and then he made so
bold as to bother the prison superintendent: why hadn‘t he been
taken in a prisoner transport? (And every day in all the cells
they kept calling out the name of some Zvyaga.) And when a
month later or a half—year later they got around to combing
through all the cases by calling the roll, what they had left was
just one file—belonging to Zvyaga, a multiple offender, sentenced
for a double murder and robbing a store, ten years—and one shy
prisoner who was trying to tell everybody that he was Yevrashkin,
although you couldn‘t make anything out from the photo, and so
he damn well was Zvyaga and he had to be tucked away in a
penalty camp, Ivdellag—because otherwise it would have been
necessary to confess that the transit prison had made a mistake.
(And as for that other Yevrashkin who had been sent off on a
prisoner transport, you wouldn‘t even be able to find where he had
gone—because none of the lists were left. And anyway he had
only had a one—year term and had been sent to do farm work with—
out being under guard and got three days off his sentence for
every day he worked, or else he had simply run away, and was
long since home or, more likely, was already imprisoned again on
a new sentence.) There were also eccentrics who sold their short
terms for a kilo or two of fat bacon. They figured that in any
case the authorities would check up and establish their correct
identities. And sometimes they did.""

10. And, as P. Yakubovich writes in reference to the so—called "cadgers,"
the sale of prison terms took place in the last century too. It is an ancient
prison trick.
