The Ports of the Archipelago | 551

She was there for a long time and they didn‘t drive her off,
probably because the guards were too lazy to climb the hill. But
finally a soldier climbed up and began to shout and wave his hands
at her—and chased her away.

The transit prison also gives the prisoner some kind of over—all
view, some breadth of outlook. As they say: even though there‘s
nothing to eat, still it‘s a gay life. In the incessant traffic here, in
the comings and goings of dozens and hundreds of people, in the
frankness of the stories and conversations (in camp they don‘t
talk so freely because they are always afraid there of stepping
into the trap of the Oper, the Security officer), you are refreshed,
you are aired out, you become more lucid, and you begin to un—
derstand better what is happening to you, to your people, even to
the world. Even one single eccentric who turns up in your cell can
tell you things you‘ll never in your life read about.

All of a sudden they introduce into the cell some kind of
miracle: a tall young military man with a Roman profile, curly
and unclipped flaxen locks, in a British uniform—just as if he
had come straight from the Normandy landing, an officer of the
invading army. He enters as proudly as if he expected everyone
to rise to their feet in his presence. And it turns out that he had
simply not expected to be among friends at this point: he had
already been imprisoned for two years, but he had never yet been
in a cell and he had been brought secretly, right to the transit
prison itself, in an individual Stolypin compartment. And then,
unexpectedly, either by mistake or else with special intent, he
had been admitted to our common stable. He looked around the
cell, saw a Wehrmacht officer there in German uniform, and
started to argue with him in German; and there they were arguing
heatedly, ready, it seemed, to resort to weapons if they‘d had any.
Five years had passed since the war, and it had been drummed
into us that in the West the war had been waged only for the sake
of appearances, and to us it was strange to observe their mutual
outrage: the German had been with us for a long time, and we
Russians hadn‘t argued with him; for the most part we had
laughed with him.

No one would have believed the story of Erik Arvid Andersen
had it not been for his unshorn locks—a miracle unique in all
