186 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

with astonishment, and alarm, I became aware of the work of
this internal sensor relay as a constant, inborn trait. The years
passed and I lay on the same bunks, marched in the same forma—
tions, and worked in the same work brigades with hundreds of
others. And always that secret sensor relay, for whose creation
I deserved not the least bit of credit, worked even before I remem—
bered it was there, worked at the first sight of a human face and
eyes, at the first sound of a voice—so that I opened my heart to
that person either fully or just the width of a crack, or else shut
myself off from him completely. This was so consistently un—
failing that all the efforts of the State Security officers to employ
stool pigeons began to seem to me as insignificant as being
pestered by gnats: after all, a person who has undertaken to be
a traitor always betrays the fact in his face and in his voice, and
even though some were more skilled in pretense, there was always
something fishy about them. On the other hand, the sensor relay
helped me distinguish those to whom I could from the very begin—
ning of our acquaintance completely disclose my most precious
depths and secrets—secrets for which heads roll. Thus it was
that I got through eight years of imprisonment, three years of
exile, and another six years of underground authorship, which
were in no wise less dangerous. During all those seventeen years
I recklessly revealed myself to dozens of people—and didn‘t
make a misstep even once. (I have never read about this trait
anywhere, and I mention it here for those interested in psy—
chology. It seems to me that such spiritual sensors exist in many
of us, but because we live in too technological and rational an age,
we neglect this miracle and don‘t allow it to develop.)

We set up the cot, and I was then ready to talk—in a whisper,
of course, and lying down, so as not to be sent from this cozy
nest into a punishment cell. But our third cellmate, a middle—
aged man whose cropped head already showed the white bristles
of imminent grayness, peered at me discontentedly and said with
characteristic northern severity: "Tomorrow! Night is for sleep—
ing."

gThat was the most intelligent thing to do. At any minute,
one of us could have been pulled out for interrogation and held
until 6 A.M., when the interrogator would go home to sleep but
we were forbidden to.
