538 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

and it simply poured out of us after we ate. There were a hundred
of us in a cell a little larger than the average room in an apart—
ment, and we were packed in, and you couldn‘t find a place on
the floor for your feet. And two little windows on the south side
were blocked with "muzzles" made of steel sheets. They not only
kept the air from circulating, but they got very hot from the sun
and radiated heat into the cell.

Just as all transit prisons are pointless, talk about transit
prisons is pointless, and, in all probability, this chapter, too, will
turn out to be the same: one doesn‘t know what to take hold of
first, what particular thing to talk about, what to lead off with.
And the more people that are crowded into transit prisons, the
more pointless it all becomes. It is unbearable for a human being,
and it is inexpedient for Gulag—but people sit there month after
month. And the transit prison becomes a straight factory: bread
rations are lugged in, stacked up in hand barrows like those in
which bricks are hauled. And the steaming gruel is brought in
six—bucket wooden casks that have holes knocked in them with
a crowbar.

The transit prison at Kotlas was tenser and more aboveboard
than many. Tenser because it opened the way to the whole North—
east of European Russia, and more aboveboard because it was
already deep in the Archipelago, and there was no need to pre—
tend to anybody. It was simply a piece of land divided into cages
by fencing and the cages were all kept locked. Although it
had been thickly settled by peasants when they were exiled in
1930 (one must realize that they had no roofs over their heads,
but nobody is left to tell about it), even in 1938 there simply
wasn‘t room for everyone in the frail one—story wooden barracks
made of discarded end—pieces of lumber and covered with . . .
tarpaulin. Under the wet autumn snow and in freezing tempera—
tures people simply lived there on the ground, beneath the
heavens. True, they weren‘t allowed to grow numb from in—
activity. They were being counted endlessly; they were in—
vigorated by check—ups (twenty thousand people were there at
a time) or by sudden night searches. Later on tents were pitched
in these cages, and log houses two stories high were built in some
of them, but to reduce the construction costs sensibly, no floor
was laid between the stories—six—story bunks with stepladders
