The Ports of the Archipelago | 557

to keep up their financial end, the bosses of transit prisons might
sometimes even drive their loafing transit manpower out to labor.

The work at that same Kotlas Transit Prison before the war
was not the least bit easier than in a regular camp. In the course
of a winter day six or seven weakened prisoners were harnessed to
a tractor (!) sledge and had to drag it seven miles along the
Dvina River to the mouth of the Vychegda. They got stuck in
snow and fell down, and the sledges got stuck. And it would seem
that any work more wearing and debilitating could hardly have
been thought up! But it turned out that this wasn‘t the actual
work, but merely the warm—up. There at the mouth of the
Vychegda, they had to load thirteen cubic yards of firewood on the
sledges—and the same people harnessed in the same way (Repin
is no longer with us, and this is no subject for our new artists;
it is merely a crude reproduction from nature) had to haul the
sledges back to their transit—prison home. Now what does a camp
have to offer after that! You wouldn‘t even survive to get there.
(The work—brigade leader for that task was Kolupayev, and the
work horses were electrical engineer Dmitriyev, quartermaster
corps Lieutenant Colonel Belyayev, and Vasily Vlasov, who is
already familiar to us; but not all the other names can be col—
lected at this date.)

During the war the Arzamas Transit Prison fed its prisoners
beet tops and at the same time put them to work on a permanent
basis. There were garment shops, a footgear—felting shop (where
woolen fibers were fulled in hot water and acids).

In the summer of 1945 we went out of the stiflingly stagnant
cells of Krasnaya Presnya to work as volunteers: for the right to
breathe air the whole day long; for the right to sit unhurried and
unhindered in a quiet plank latrine (an incentive that is often
overlooked!) heated by the August sun (and these were the days
of Potsdam and Hiroshima), listening to the peaceful buzzing of a
lonely bee; and, last, for the right to get an extra quarter—pound
of bread at night. They took us to the wharves of the Moscow
River, where timber was being unloaded. It was our job to roll
the logs off some of the piles, carry them over and stack them in
other piles. We spent a good deal more strength than we received
extra food in compensation. Nonetheless we enjoyed going out to
work there.
