The Supreme Measure | 441

In that same Kresty Prison in Leningrad, in 1932, two of
the men in death cells were Feldman, convicted of possessing
foreign currency, and Faitelevich, a student at the conservatory,
for having sold steel ribbon for pen points. Primordial commerce,
the bread and butter and pastime of the Jew, had also become
worthy of the death penalty.

Ought we to be surprised then that the Ivanovo Province
village lad Geraska got the death penalty? In honor of the spring
St. Nicholas holiday, he went off to the next village to celebrate;
he drank heavily and, with a stick, he hit the rear end—no, not of
the policeman himself, but of the policeman‘s horse. (True, in a
rage at the police he ripped a piece of board off the village soviet
building and then yanked out the village soviet telephone by the
cord, shouting: "Smash the devils!")

Whether our destiny holds a death cell in store for us is not
determined by what we have done or not done. It is determined
by the turn of a great wheel and the thrust of powerful external
circumstances. For example, Leningrad was under siege and
blockade. And what would its highest—ranking leader, Comrade
Zhdanov, think if there were no executions among the cases in
Leningrad State Security during such difficult times? He would
think the Organs were lying down on the job, would he not?
Were there not big underground plots, directed from outside by
the Germans, to be discovered? Why were such plots discovered
under Stalin in 1919 and not under Zhdanov in 1942? No
sooner ordered than done. Several ramified plots were discovered.
You were asleep in your unheated Leningrad room, and the sharp
claws of the black hand were already hovering over you. And
yet none of this depended on you. Notice was taken of a
Lieutenant General Ignatovsky, whose windows looked out on
the Neva; he had pulled out a white handkerchief to blow his
nose. Aha, a signal! Furthermore, because Ignatovsky was an
engineer, he liked to talk about machinery with the sailors. And
that clinched it! Ignatovsky was arrested. The time for reckoning
came. Come on now, name forty members of your organization.
He named them. And so, if you happened to be an usher at the
Aleksandrinsky Theatre, your chances of being named as one
of his particular forty were minimal. But if you were a professor
at the Technological Institute, there you were on that list (once
