The Law as a Child | 309

no . . . verbal arguments can help.""" (Such as arguments by
lawyers, etc.) "In our revolutionary court we are guided not by
articles of the law and not by the degree of extenuating circum—
stances; in the tribunal we must proceed on the basis of con—
siderations of expediency."""

That was the way it was in those years: people lived and
breathed and then suddenly found out that their existence was
inexpedient.

And it must also be kept in mind that it was not what he had
done that constituted the defendant‘s burden, but what he might
do if he were not shot now. "We protect ourselves not only
against the past but also against the future.""

Comrade Krylenko‘s pronouncements are clear and all—inclu—
sive. They bring alive for us that whole period of the law in sharp
relief. The clarity of autumn suddenly pierces the mists of spring
and reaches us. And is it perhaps unnecessary to go further?
Perhaps we aren‘t required to page through trial after trial. These
pronouncements will be henceforth inexorably applied.

Close your eyes tight for a minute and picture a tiny court—
room—not yet gilded. Earnest members of the tribunal in simple
field jackets, lean, not yet fat—faced. The accusing power—as
Krylenko loved to style himself—wears an unbuttoned civilian
jacket, with a glimpse of a sailor‘s striped undershirt just visible
at the open throat.

The supreme accuser expresses himself in this sort of language:
"The question of fact is interesting to me!"; "Define concretely
the aspect of the tendency!"; "We are operating on the plane of
analysis of objective truth." Sometimes, as you read, a quotation
from the Latin shines out. (It is true that the same quotation turns
up in case after case, but, after several years, a different one does
appear.) And no wonder—he did, after all, complete the course
in two faculties despite all his revolutionary running around.
What attracts one to him are his frank opinions about the de—
fendants: "Professional scoundrels!" And he isn‘t hypocritical
in the least. If he didn‘t like the defendant‘s smile, he didn‘t hes—
itate to blurt out a threat, even before any sentence was imposed.

29. Ibid:, p. 81.
30. Ibid., p. 524.
31. Ibid., p. 82.
