580 | THE GULAG ARCHIPEL AGO

ration, and if the trip in question was a hard one, they didn‘t
hesitate to whip away the holy crutch (in other words, they took
the gray cattle‘s rations from them). The thieves whiled away the
long journey playing cards, and they made their own decks." They
got the stakes for their card games by frisking the suckers, search—
ing everyone lying in a particular section of the barge. For a
certain length of time they won and lost and rewon and relost
their loot, and then it floated up to the convoy. Yes, the reader
has now guessed everything: the thieves had the convoy on the
hook; the convoy either kept the stolen things for themselves or
sold them at the wharves and brought the thieves something to
eat in exchange.

And what about resistance? It happened—but only rarely.
One case has been preserved. In 1950 on such a barge as I have
described, except that it was larger—a seagoing barge en route
from Vladivostok to Sakhalin—seven unarmed 58‘s resisted the
thieves (in this case bitches), who numbered about eighty in all
(some with knives, as usual). These bitches had searched the
whole transport back at Vladivostok transit point three—ten, and
they had searched it very thoroughly, in no way less efficiently
than the jailers; they knew all the hiding places, but no search
can ever turn up everything. Aware of this, when they were al—
ready in the hold they treacherously announced: "Whoever has
money can buy makhorka." And Misha Grachev got out three
rubles he had hidden in his quilted jacket. And the bitch Volodka
Tatarin shouted at him:; "You crowbait, why don‘t you pay your
taxes?" And he rushed in to take it away. But Master Sergeant
Pavel (whose last name has not been recorded) pushed him
away. Volodka Tatarin aimed a slingshot—a "V" fork—at
Pavel‘s eyes, and Pavel knocked him off his feet. Immediately
twenty to thirty bitckes moved in on him. And around Grachev
and Pavel gathered Volodya Shpakov, a former army captain,
Seryezha Potapov, Volodya Reunov, a former army sergeant,
Volodya Tretyukin, another former sergeant, and Vasa Krav—
tsov. And what happened? The whole thing ended after only a few
blows had been exchanged. This may have been a matter of the
age—old and very real cowardice of the thieves (always concealed
behind feigned toughness and devil—may—care insolence); or else

5. V. Shalamov tells about this in detail in his Ocherki prestupnogo mira
(Sketches of the Criminal World).
