The Law Becomes a Man | 351

The reader can observe that the court was gradually assuming
forms familiar to us.

Metropolitan Veniamin was accused of entering, with evil
intent, into an agreement with . . . the Soviet government, no
less, and thereby obtaining a relaxation of the decree on the
requisition of valuables. It was charged that his appeal to Pomgol
had been maliciously disseminated among the people. (Samizdat!
—self—publication!) And he had also acted in concert with the
world bourgeoisie.

Priest Krasnitsky, one of the principal "Living Church" schis—
matics, and GPU collaborator, testified that the priests had con—
spired to provoke a revolt against the Soviet government on the
grounds of famine.

The only witnesses heard were those of the prosecution. De—
fense witnesses were not permitted to testify. (Oh, how familiar
it all is! More and more!)

Accuser Smirnov demanded "sixteen heads." Accuser Krasikov
cried out: "The whole Orthodox Church is a subversive organiza—
tion. Properly speaking, the entire church ought to be put in
prison."

(This was a very realistic program. Soon it was almost realized.
And it was a good basis for a dialogue.)

Let us make use of a rather rare opportunity to cite several
sentences that have been preserved from the speech of S. Y.
Gurovich, who was the Metropolitan‘s defense attorney.

"There are no proofs of guilt. There are no facts. There is not
even an indictment. . . . What will history say? [Oh, he certainly
had discovered how to frighten them! History will forget and say
nothing!] The requisition of church valuables in Petrograd took
place in a complete calm, but here the Petrograd clergy is on the
defendants‘ bench, and somebody‘s hands keep pushing them
toward death. The basic principle which you stress is the good
of the Soviet government. But do not forget that the church will
be nourished by the blood of martyrs. [Not in the Soviet Union,
though!] There is nothing more to be said, but it is hard to stop
talking. While the debate lasts, the defendants are alive. When
the debate comes to an end, life will end too."

The tribunal condemned ten of them to death. They waited
more than a month for their execution, until the trial of the SR‘s
