The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 55

Gulag organized that the cities would have noticed nothing had
they not been stricken by a strange three—year famine—a famine
that came about without drought and without war.

This wave was also distinct from all those which preceded it
because no one fussed about with taking the head of the family
first and then working out what to do with the rest of the family.
On the contrary, in this wave they burned out whole nests, whole
families, from the start; and they watched jealously to be sure
that none of the children—fourteen, ten, even six years old——
got away: to the last scrapings, all had to go down the same
road, to the same common destruction. (This was the first such
experiment—at least in modern history. It was subsequently re—
peated by Hitler with the Jews, and again by Stalin with nation—
alities which were disloyal to him or suspected by him.)

This wave included only pathetically few of those kulaks for
whom it was named, in order to draw the wool over people‘s eyes.
In Russian a kulak is a miserly, dishonest rural trader who grows
rich not by his own labor but through someone else‘s, through
usury and operating as a middleman. In every locality even before
the Revolution such kulaks could be numbered on one‘s fingers.
And the Revolution totally destroyed their basis of activity. Sub—
sequently, after 1917, by a transfer of meaning, the name kulak
began to be applied (in official and propaganda literature, whence
it moved into general usage) to all those who in any way hired
workers, even if it was only when they were temporarily short of
working hands in their own families. But we must keep in mind
that after the Revolution it was impossible to pay less than a fair
wage for all such labor—the Committees of the Poor and the vil—
lage soviets looked after the interests of landless laborers. Just let
somebody try to swindle a landless laborer! To this very day, in
fact, the hiring of labor at a fair wage is permitted in the Soviet
Union.

But the inflation of this scathing term kulak proceeded relent—
lessly, and by 1930 all strong peasants in general were being so
called—all peasants strong in management, strong in work, or
even strong merely in convictions. The term kulak was used to
smash the strength of the peasantry. Let us remember, let us open
our eyes: only a dozen years had passed since the great Decree on
the Land—that very decree without which the peasants would
