288 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

spiritually Dostoyevsky far outstripped the realities of our life,
and he worried about what he shouldn‘t have worried about! He
believed that we had achieved open trials once and for all! (In— |
deed, who among his contemporaries could have believed in the
OSO?) And somewhere else he writes: "It is better to err on the
side of mercy than on that of the death penalty." Oh, yes, yes,
es!

* Excesses of eloquence do not afflict exclusively a judicial sys—
tem in process of being established; even more conspicuously,
they afflict an already established democracy that has not yet dis—
covered its moral goals. England again gives us examples, as
when, for partisan advantage, the leader of the opposition does
not hesitate to blame the government for a national predicament
worse than actually exists.

Excesses of eloquence are a malady. But what word can we
then use for the excessive use of closed doors? Dostoyevsky

dreamed of a court in which everything essential to the defense
_ of the accused would be set forth by the prosecutor. How many
aeons will we have to wait for that? Our social experience has so
far enriched us immeasurably with defense lawyers who accuse
the defendant. ("As an honest Soviet person, as a true patriot,
I cannot but feel repugnance at the disclosure of these evil
deeds.")

And how comfortable it all is for the judges in a closed session!
Judicial robes are not required and one can even roll up one‘s
sleeves. How easy it is to work! There are no public—address sys—
tems, no newspapermen, and no public. (Well, there is a public,
an audience, but it consists of inferrogators. For example, they
used to attend the Leningrad Province Court during the day to
find out how their "protégés" were conducting themselves, and
at night went calling on those prisoners who needed to have their
consciences appealed to.)®

The second main characteristic of our political courts is the
lack of ambiguity in their work, which is to say predetermined
verdicts.* In other words, you, a judge, always know what the

3. Ch n‘s group.

4. That same collection edited by A. Y. Vyshinsky, Of Tyurem k Vospita—
telnym Uchrezhdeniyam, includes materials indicating that the predetermination

of verdicts is an old, old story. In 1924—1929, sentences were determined by
joint administrative and economic considerations. Beginning in 1924, because of

 
