That Spring | 259

rebels. And at that point, all the hurt, bitterness, and anger
against the Germans that had accumulated during three cruel
and futile years in the breasts of the enslaved Russians was
vented in the attack on the Germans. They were shoved out of
Prague from an unexpected direction. Did all Czechs realize
later which Russians had saved their city? Our own history is
similarly distorted; we claim that Prague was saved by Soviet
armies, although they couldn‘t have gotten there in time.

Then the Vlasov army began to retreat toward Bavaria and
the Americans. They were pinning all their hopes on the possi—
bility of being useful to the Allies; in this way their years of
dangling in the German noose would finally become meaningful.
But the Americans greeted them with a wall of armor and forced
them to surrender to Soviet hands, as stipulated by the Yalta
Conference. In Austria that May, Churchill perpetrated the same
sort of "act of a loyal ally," but, out of our accustomed modesty,
we did not publicize it. He turned over to the Soviet command
the Cossack corps of 90,000 men.‘" Along with them, he also

12. This surrender was an act of double—dealing consistent with the spirit of
traditional English diplomacy, The heart of the matter was that the Cossacks
were determined to fight to the death, or to cross the ocean, all the way to
Paraguay or Indochina if they had to . . . anything rather than surrender alive.
Therefore, the English proposed, first, that the Cossacks give up their arms
on the pretext of replacing them with standardized weapons. Then the officers
—without the enlisted men—were summoned to a supposed conference on the
future of the army in the city of Judenburg in the English occupation zone.
But the English had secretly turned the city over to the Soviet armies the night
before. Forty busloads of officers, all the way from commanders of companies
on up to General Krasnov himself, crossed a high viaduct and drove straight
down into a semicircle of Black Marias, next to which stood convoy guards
with lists in their hands. The road back was blocked by Soviet tanks. The officers
didn‘t even have anything with which to shoot themselves or to stab themselves
to death, since their weapons had been taken away. They jumped from the
viaduct onto the paving stones below. Immediately afterward, and just as
treacherously, the English turned over the rank—and—file soldiers by the train—
load—pretending that they were on their way to receive new weapons from
their commanders.

In their own countries Roosevelt and Churchill are honored as embodiments
of statesmanlike wisdom. To us, in our Russian prison conversations, their
consistent shortsightedness and stupidity stood out as astonishingly obvious.
How could they, in their decline from 1941 to 1945, fail to secure any guar—
antees whatever of the independence of Eastern Europe? How could they give
away broad regions of Saxony and Thuringia in exchange for the preposterous
toy of a four—zone Berlin, their own future Achilles‘ heel? And what was the
military or political sense in their surrendering to destruction at Stalin‘s hands
hundreds of thousands of armed Soviet citizens determined not to surrender?
They say it was the price they paid for Stalin‘s agreeing to enter the war against
Japan. With the atom bomb already in their hands, they paid Stalin for not
