74 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

that was still less than the dispossessed kulaks got and their
children did not go to the Archipelago.)

Piles of victims! Hills of victims! A frontal assault of the
NKVD on the city: In one wave, for example, G. P. Matveyeva
saw not only her husband but all three of her brothers arrested,
and all in different cases. (Of the four, three never returned.)

An electrician had a high—tension line break in his sector:
58—7—twenty years. i

A Perm worker, Novikov, was accused of planning to blow
up a Kama River Bridge.

In that same city of Perm, Yuzhakov was arrested during
the day, and at night they came for his wife. They presented
her with a list of names and demanded that she sign a confession
that they had all met in her house at a Menshevik—SR meeting
(of course, they had not). They promised in return to let her
out to be with her three children. She signed, destroying all those
listed, and, of course, she herself remained in prison.

Nadezhda Yudenich was arrested because of her family name.
True, they established, after nine months, that she was not related
to the White general, and they let her out (a mere trifle: during
that time her mother had died of worry).

The film Lenin in October was shown in Staraya Russa. Some—
one present noticed the phrase in the film, "Palchinsky must
know!" Palchinsky was defending the Winter Palace. But we have
a nurse working here named Palchinskaya! Arrest her! They did
arrest her. And it turned out that she actually was his wife—
who had hidden in the provinces following his execution.

In 1930, as small boys, the three brothers Pavel, Ivan, and
Stepan Borushko came to the Soviet Union from Poland to live
with their parents. Now as young men they were arrested for
PSh—Suspicion of Espionage—and got ten years.

A streetcar motorwoman of Krasnodar was returning on foot
late at night from the car depot; on the outskirts of the city, to
her misfortune, she passed some people working to free a truck
that had gotten stuck. It turned out to be full of corpses—hands
and legs stuck out from beneath the canvas. They wrote down
her name and the next day she was arrested. The interrogator
asked her what she had seen. She told him truthfully. (Darwinian
selection!) Anti—Soviet Agitation—ten years.

A plumber turned off the loudspeaker in his room every time
