452 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

To whom else on all the earth was that morning as good as
it was to them! Grateful for the warmth of that voice and the
warmth of that dishwater, they drifted off to sleep until noon.
(They ate only in the morning!) Many were unable to eat when
they woke during the day. Someone had received a parcel. Rela—
tives might or might not know about the death sentence. Once
in the cell, these parcels became common property, but they lay
and rotted there in the stagnant damp.

By day there was still a little life and activity in the cell.
The block supervisor might come around—either gloomy
Tarakanov or friendly Makarov—and offer paper on which to
write petitions, and ask whether any of them who had some
money wanted to buy smokes from the commissary. Their ques—
tions seemed either too outrageous or extraordinarily human:
the pretense was being made that they weren‘t condemned men
at all, was that it?

The condemned men broke off the bottoms of matchboxes,
marked them like dominoes, and played away. Vlasov eased his
tension by telling someone about the Consumer Cooperatives, and
his narrative always took on a comic touch."" Yakov Petrovich
Kolpakov, the Chairman of the Sudogda District Executive Com—
mittee, a Bolshevik since the spring of 1917 who joined up at
the front, sat for dozens of days without changing his position,
squeezing his head in his hands, his elbows on his knees, always
staring at the same spot on the wall. (It must have been so jolly
to recall the spring of 1917.) Vlasov‘s garrulity irritated him:
"How can you?" And Vlasov snapped back at him: "And what
are you doing? Preparing yourself for heaven?" Vlasov spoke
with round "o‘s" even in a fast retort. "For myself, I‘ve decided
one thing only. I‘m going to tell the executioner: ‘You alone,
not the judges, not the prosecutors, you alone are guilty of my
death, and you are going to have to live with it! If it weren‘t
for you willing executioners, there would be no death sen—
tences!‘ So then let him kill me, the rat!"

Kolpakov was shot. Konstantin Sergeyevich Arkadyev, the
former Manager of the Aleksandrov District Agricultural De—
partment in Vladimir Province, was shot. Somehow, in his case,

10. His stories about the consumer cooperatives are remarkable and deserve
to be published.
