78 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

several thousand families of unreliable Lithuanians. (Four thou—
sand of them were subsequently turned over to be plundered by
thieves in camp at Krasnoyarsk.) From June 23 on, in Latvia and
Estonia, they speeded up the arrests. But the ground was burning
under them, and they were forced to leave even faster. They
forgot to take whole fortresses with them, like the one at Brest,
but they did not forget to shoot down political prisoners in the
cells and courtyards of Lvov, Rovno, Tallinn, and many other
Western prisons. In the Tartu Prison they shot 192 prisoners and
threw their corpses down a well.

How can one visualize it? You know nothing. The door of your
cell opens, and they shoot you. You cry out in your death agony,
and there is no one to hear your cries or tell of them except the
prison stones. They say, however, that there were some who
weren‘t successfully finished off, and we may someday read a
book about that too.

In the rear, the first wartime wave was for those spreading
rumors and panic. That was the language of a special decree, out—
side the Code, issued in the first days of the war.*" This was just a
trial bloodletting in order to maintain a general state of tension.
They gave everyone ten years for it, but it was not considered
part of Article 58, and therefore those few who survived the war—
time camps were amnestied in 1945.

Then there was a wave of those who failed to turn in radio
receivers or radio parts. For one radio tube found (as a result of
denunciation) they gave ten years.

Then there was the wave of Germans—Germans living on the
Volga, colonists in the Ukraine and the North Caucasus, and all
Germans in general who lived anywhere in the Soviet Union. The
determining factor here was blood, and even heroes of the Civil
War and old members of the Party who were German were sent
off into exile."

40. I myself almost felt the impact of that decree. I was standing in line at
the bread store, when a policeman called me out and took me off for the sake
of his score. If it had not been for a fortunate intervention, I might have started
out in Gulag right away instead of going off to war.

41. They judged blood by family name. The design engineer Vasily Okorokov
had found it inconvenient to sign his drawings with his real name. Consequently,
in the thirties, when it was still legally possible, he had changed his name to
Robert Shtekker. It was elegant, and he was able to work up a good—looking
professional signature with it. Now he was arrested as a German—and given
