The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 71

The composition of the hordes who were arrested in that
powerful wave and lugged off, half—dead, to the Archipelago was
of such fantastic diversity that anyone who wants to deduce the
rationale for it scientifically will rack his brain a long time for
the answer. (To the contemporaries of the purge it was still more
incomprehensible. )

The real law underlying the arrests of those years was the
assignment of quotas, the norms set, the planned allocations.
Every city, every district, every military unit was assigned a
specific quota of arrests to be carried out by a stipulated time.
From then on everything else depended on the ingenuity of the
Security operations personnel.

The former Chekist Aleksandr Kalganov recalls that a tele—
gram arrived in Tashkent: "Send 200!" They had just finished
one clean—out, and it seemed as if there was "no one else" to take.
Well, true, they had just brought in about fifty more from the
districts. And then they had an idea! They would reclassify as
58‘s all the nonpolitical offenders being held by the police. No
sooner said than done. But despite that, they had still not filled the
quota. At that precise moment the police reported that a gypsy
band had impudently encamped on one of the city squares and
asked what to do with them. Someone had another bright idea!
They surrounded the encampment and raked in all the gypsy
men from seventeen to sixty as 58‘s! They had fulfilled the plan!

This could happen another way as well: according to Chief of
Police Zabolovsky, the Chekists of Ossetia were given a quota
of five hundred to be shot in the Republic. They asked to have
it increased, and they were permitted another 250.

Telegrams transmitting instructions of this kind were sent via
ordinary channels in a very rudimentary code. In Temryuk the
woman telegrapher, in holy innocence, transmitted to the NKVD
switchboard the message that 240 boxes of soap were to be
shipped to Krasnodar the following day. In the morning she
learned about a big wave of arrests and guessed the meaning of
the message! She told her girl friend what kind of telegram it
was—and was promptly arrested herself.

(Was it indeed totally by chance that the code words for
human beings were a box of soap? Or were they familiar with
soap—making?)
