258 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

of the occupied areas held them in contempt as German hire—
lings. So did the Germans, because of their Russian blood. Their
pitiful little newspapers were worked over with a German cen—
sor‘s broadsword: Greater Germany and the Fiihrer. And the
Vlasov—men had one way out of all that—to fight to the death,
and, when they were not fighting, to down vodka and more
vodka. Foredoomed—that: was their existence during all their
years of war and alien lands; and there was no salvation for
them from any direction.

Hitler and those around him, even when they were retreating
on every front and were staring their own destruction in the face,
could still not overcome their intense distrust of wholly separate
Russian units; they could not bring themselves to organize divi—
sions that were entirely Russian, to allow even the shadow of a
Russia that was not totally subject to them. Only in the crack
of the final debacle, in November, 1944, was a belated theatrical
production at last permitted in Prague: the creation of a "Com—
mittee for the Liberation of the Peoples of Russia," combining
all the different national groups, and a manifesto, which, like
everything that had preceded it, was neither fish nor fowl, since
the concept of a Russia independent of Germany and Nazism
was still not tolerated. Vlasov became chairman of the commit—
tee. And only in the fall of 1944 did they begin to form Vlasov
divisions that were exclusively Russian." Probably the wise Ger—
man political leaders had concluded that at this point the Russian
workers in Germany (the "ostovtsy") would rush to take up
arms. But the Red Army was already on the Vistula and the
Danube. And ironically, as though to confirm the farsightedness
of the very nearsighted Germans, those Vlasov divisions, in their
first and last independent action, dealt a blow—to the Germans
themselves. In the general disaster, Vlasov gathered up his two
and a half divisions near Prague at the end of April, without
coordinating his action with the German Supreme Command.
It became known at this point that SS General Steiner was pre—
paring to destroy the Czech capital rather than surrender it in—
tact. And Vlasov ordered his divisions to the aid of the Czech

11. They were: the ist, based on "the Kaminsky brigade," under S. K.
Bunyachenko; the 2nd, under Zverev (former military commandant of Khar—

kov); half the 3rd; segments of the 4th; and Maltsev‘s air force detachment.
Only four divisions were authorized..
