The Law Matures | 409

been called the "Leninist guard"—came before the judges
drenched in their own urine.

And even though much appears to have been clarified since
then—with particular success by Arthur Koestler—the riddle
continues to circulate as durably as ever.

People have speculated about a Tibetan potion that deprives
a man of his will, and about the use of hypnosis. Such explana—
tions must by no means be rejected: if the NKVD possessed such
methods, clearly there were no moral rules to prevent resorting
to them. Why not weaken or muddle the will? And it is a known
fact that in the twenties some leading hypnotists gave up their
careers and entered the service of the GPU. It is also reliably
known that in the thirties a school for hypnotists existed in the
NKVD. Kamenev‘s wife was allowed to visit her husband before
his trial and found him not himself, his reactions retarded. (And
she managed to communicate this to others before she herself
was arrested.)

But why was neither Palchinsky nor Khrennikov broken by
the Tibetan potion or hypnosis?

The fact is that an explanation on a higher, psychological
plane is called for.

One misunderstanding in particular results from the image of
these men as old revolutionaries who had not trembled in
Tsarist dungeons—seasoned, tried and true, hardened, etc.,
fighters. But there is a plain and simple mistake here. These de—
fendants were not those old revolutionaries. They had acquired
that glory by inheritance from and association with the Narod—
niks, the SR‘s, and the Anarchists. They were the ones, the bomb
throwers and the conspirators, who had known hard—labor im—
prisonment and real prison terms—but even they had never in
their lives experienced a genuinely merciless interrogation (be—
cause such a thing did not exist at all in Tsarist Russia). And
these others, the Bolshevik defendants at the treason trials, had
never known either interrogation or real prison terms. The Bol—
sheviks had never been sentenced to special "dungeons," any
Sakhalin, any special hard labor in Yakutsk. It is well known
that Dzerzhinsky had the hardest time of them all, that he had
spent all his life in prisons. But, according to our yardstick, he
had served fust a normal "tenner," just a simple "ten—ruble bill,"
