462 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

in war (or the kind that‘s needed for flying in outer space), the
kind which jingle—jangles with medals. We have forgotten another
concept of valor—civil valor. And that‘s all our society needs,
just that, just that, just that! That‘s all we need and that‘s exactly
what we haven‘t got.

In 1923, in Vyatka Prison, the SR Struzhinsky and his com—
rades (how many were there? who were they? what were they
protesting against?) barricaded themselves in a cell, poured kero—
sene over all the mattresses, and incinerated themselves. Now
that was an act altogether in the tradition of Sci.liisselburg before
the Revolution; and, not to go further, what an uproar such an
act provoked then, before the Revolution, and how all Russian
society was aroused! But this time around neither Vyatka knew
about them, nor Moscow, nor history. And yet the human flesh
crackled in the flames in exactly the same way.

That was the initial purpose of imprisonment on the Solovetsky
Islands (nicknamed Solovki): it was such a good place, cut off
from communication with the outside world for half a year at a
time. You couldn‘t be heard from there no matter how loud you
shouted, and you could even burn yourself up for all anyone
would know. In 1923 the imprisoned socialists were transported
there from Pertominsk on the Onega Peninsula—and split up
among three isolated monasteries.

Take Savvatyevsky Monastery, consisting of the two buildings
which had formerly been guest quarters for religious believers on
pilgrimage. Part of the lake was included in the prison compound.
In the early months everything seemed to be all right: they had
their special political regimen, several relatives succeeded in get—
ting there for visits, and three spokesmen from the three parties
were wholly responsible for negotiating with the prison adminis—
tration. And the monastery compound was a free zone. Inside it
the prisoners could talk, think, and do as they pleased without
hindrance.

But even then, at the dawn of the Archipelago, there were in—
sistent unpleasant latrine rumors (not yet so called) to the effect
that the special political regimen was going to be liquidated.

And, in reality, having waited until the middle of December,
until the White Sea was no longer navigable, with the consequent
cutoff in all communication with the outside world, the chief of
