In the Engine Room | 283

kind of "bourgeois weighing of punishments in relation to the
gravity of what had been committed." )*

Alas, it is not for us to write the absorbing history of this
particular Organ: how the Troikas turned into OSO‘s; or when
they got renamed; or whether there were OSO‘s in provincial cen—
ters, or just one of them in the Great Palace; or which of our
great and proud leaders were members; or how often they met and
how long their sessions lasted; whether or not they were served
tea while they worked, and if they were, what was served with
the tea; and how the work itself proceeded—did they converse
while it was going on or not? We are not the ones who will write
this history—because we don‘t know. All that we have heard
is that the essence of the OSO was triune. And even though it is
still impossible to name its industrious members, yet we do know
the three organs permanently represented there: one member
represented the Central Committee of the Party, one the MVD,
and one the Chief Prosecutor‘s office. However, it would not be
a miracle if we should learn someday that there were never any
sessions, and that there was only a staff of experienced typists
composing extracts from nonexistent records of proceedings, and
one general administrator who directed the typists. As for typists,
there were certainly typists. That we can guarantee.

Up to 1924, the authority of the Troika was limited to sen—
tences of three years, maximum. From 1924 on, they moved up
to five years of camp; from 1937 on, the OSO could turn out "ten—
ruble bills"; after 1948, they could rivet a "quarter"—twenty—
five years—on you. And there are people—Chavdarov, for
example—who know that during the war years the OSO even
sentenced prisoners to execution by shooting. Nothing unusual
about this.

The OSO was nowhere mentioned in either the Constitution
or the Code. However, it turned out to be the most convenient
kind of hamburger machine—easy to operate, undemanding, and
requiring no legal lubrication. The Code existed on its own, and
the OSO existed on its own, and it kept on deftly grinding without
all the Code‘s 205 articles, neither invoking them nor even men—
tioning them.

2. Vyshinsky, Of Tyurem k VospitateInym Uchrezhdeniyam.
