That Spring | 249

kind of factory, or mine, or construction project, and the former
POW‘s, looking out on the Motherland newly restored to them
through the same barbed wire through which they had seen
Germany, could begin work from their first day on a ten—hour
work day. Those under suspicion were questioned during their
rest periods, in the evenings, and at night, and there were large
numbers of Security officers and interrogators in the PFL‘s for
this purpose. As always, the interrogation began with the
hypothesis that you were obviously guilty. And you, without
going outside the barbed wire, had to prove that you were not
guilty. Your only available means to this end was to rely on
witnesses who were exactly the same kind of POW‘s as you.
Obviously they might not have turned up in your own PFL; they
might, in fact, be at the other end of the country; in that case, the
Security officers of, say, Kemerovo would send off inquiries to
the Security officers of Solikamsk, who would question the wit—
nesses and send back their answers along with new inquiries,
and you yourself would be questioned as a witness in some other
case. True, it might take a year or two before your fate was
resolved, but after all, the Motherland was losing nothing in the
process. You were out mining coal every day. And if one of
your witnesses gave the wrong sort of testimony about you, or if
none of your witnesses was alive, you had only yourself to blame,
and you were sure to be entered in the documents as a traitor of
the Motherland. And the visiting military court would rubber—
stamp your tenner. And if, despite all their twisting things about,
it appeared that you really hadn‘t worked for the Germans, and
if—and this was the main point—you had not had the chance
to see the Americans and English with your own eyes (to have
been liberated from captivity by them instead of by us was a
gravely aggravating circumstance), then the Security officers
would decide the degree of isolation in which you were to be
held. Certain people were ordered to change their place of resi—
dence—which always breaks a person‘s ties with his environment
and makes him more vulnerable. Others were valiantly offered
the chance to go to work in the VOKhR, the Militarized Guard
Service. In that situation, while nominally remaining free, a man
lost all his personal freedom and was sent off to some isolated
area. There was a third category: after a handshake, some were
