568 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

all over the city and kept watch over the trains on the siding.
They ran along the cars, tripping over the ties and rails, and
shouting at every car: "Is So—and—so in there?" "Is So—and—so in
there?" And they ran on to the next one, and others ran up to
this one: "Is So—and—so in there?" And suddenly an answer would
come from the sealed car: "I‘m in here. I‘m here!" Or else: "Keep
looking for him. He‘s in another car." Or else: "Women! Listen!
My wife is somewhere out there, near the station. Run and tell
her."

These scenes, unworthy of our contemporary world, testify
only to the then inept organization of train embarkations. The
mistakes were noted, and after a certain night the trains were
surrounded in depth by cordons of snarling and barking police
dogs.

ind in Moscow, the loading into red cattle cars from the old
Sretenka Transit Prison (which prisoners no longer remember) or
from Krasnaya Presnya took place only at night; that was the
rule.

However, although the convoy had no use for the superfluous
light of the sun by day, on the other hand they made use of suns
by night—the searchlights. They were more efficient since they
could be concentrated on the necessary area, where the prisoners
were seated on the earth in a frightened pack awaiting the com—
mand: "Next unit of five—stand up! To the car—on the run‘!"
(Only on the run, so as not to have time to look around, to think
things over, to run as though chased by the dogs, afraid of noth—
ing so much as falling down.) On that uneven path. Up the load—
ing ramp, scrambling. And clear, hostile searchlight beams not
only provided light but were an important theatrical element in
terrorizing the prisoners, along with yells, threats, gunstock blows
on those who fell behind, and the order: "Sit down." (And some—
times, as in the station square of that same Orel: "Down on
your knees." And like some new breed of believers at prayer, the
whole thousand would get down on their knees.) Along with that
running to the car, quite unnecessary except for intimidation—
for which it was very important. Along with the enraged barking
of the dogs. Along with the leveled gun barrels (rifles or auto—
matic pistols, depending on the decade). And the main thing was
to undermine, to crush the prisoner‘s will power so he wouldn‘t
