The Slave Caravans | 571

If there are thieves in a cattle car (and they are, of course, not
kept separate in the red trains either) they take the best places,
as is traditional—on the upper bunks by the window. That‘s
in summer. So we can guess where their places are in winter. Next
to the stove, of course, in a tight ring around the stove. As the
former thief Minayev recalls; in 1949, during a severe cold
wave, they were issued only three pails of coal for their car for
the entire journey from Voronezh to Kotlas, lasting several days.‘
And in this crisis, the thieves not only occupied the places around
the stove, and not only took all the suckers‘ warm things away
from them and put them on, but didn‘t even hesitate to take their
footcloths out of their shoes and wind them around their own
feet. You today, me tomorrow. It was somewhat worse with food
—the thieves took charge of the whole ration for the car and
then kept the best for themselves along with whatever else they
needed. Loshchilin recalls a three—day prisoner transport from
Moscow to Perebory in 1937. They didn‘t cook anything hot on
the train for such a short journey and handed out only dry ra—
tions. The thieves took the best for themselves but gave the
others permission to divide up the bread and the herring; and that
meant they weren‘t hungry. When the ration was hot and the
thieves were in charge of distributing it, they divided up the gruel
among themselves. (A three—week transport from Kishinev to
Pechora in 1945.) With all this, the thieves didn‘t scruple to
engage also in plain and simple robbery en route: they noticed
an Estonian‘s gold teeth and they pushed him down and knocked
out the teeth with a poker.

The zeks considered the hot food the real advantage of the
red trains: at remote stations (again where people couldn‘t see
them) the trains stopped and gruel and porridge were doled out
to the cars. But they even managed to give out the hot food in
such a way that things went wrong. They might (as on that same
Kishinevy train) pour out the gruel in the same pails in which
they issued coal—there being nothing to wash them out with.
Because drinking water was also rationed on the train and was
in even shorter supply than gruel. And so you gulped down the
gruel, your teeth gritting on pieces of coal. Or they brought the
gruel and the hot cereal to the car and didn‘t issue enough bow!s

1. In a letter to me in the Literaturnaya Gazeta, November 29, 1963.
