506 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

him? Back in 1901 his comrades in the Party and in prison ac—
cused him of using common criminals against his political
enemies. From the twenties on, the obliging term "social ally"
came to be widely used. That was Makarenko‘s contention too:
these could be reformed. According to Makarenko, the origin of
crime lay solely in the "counterrevolutionary underground.""
(Those were the ones who couldn‘t be reformed—engineers,
priests, SR‘s, Mensheviks.)

And why shouldn‘t they steal, if there was no one to put a stop
to it? Three or four brazen thieves working hand in glove could
lord it over several dozen frightened and cowed pseudo politicals.

With the approval of the administration. On the basis of the
Progressive Doctrine.

But even if they didn‘t drive off the thieves with their fists,
why didn‘t the victims at least make complaints? After all, every
sound could be heard in the corridor, and a convoy guard was
marching slowly back and forth right out there.

Yes, that is a question! Every sound and every complaining
cry can be heard, and the convoy just keeps marching back and
forth—why doesn‘t he interfere? Just a yard away from him, in
the half—dark cave of the compartment, they are plundering a
human being—why doesn‘t the soldier of the government police
interfere?

For the very same reason: he, too, has been indoctrinated.

Even more than that: after many years of favoring thieves, the
convoy has itself slipped in their direction. The convoy has itself
become a thief.

From the middle of the thirties until the middle of the forties,
during that ten—year period of the thieves‘ most flagrant debauches
and most intense oppression of the politicals, no one at all can
recall a case in which a convoy guard intervened in the plunder—
ing of a political in a cell, in a railroad car, or in a Black Maria.
But they will tell you of innumerable cases in which the convoy
accepted stolen goods from the thieves and, in return, bought
them vodka, snacks (sweeter than the rations, too), and smokes.
The examples are so numerous as to be typical.

The convoy sergeant, after all, hasn‘t anything either: he has
his gun, his greatcoat roll, his mess tin, his soldier‘s ration. It

9. A. S. Makarenko, Flagi na Bashnyakh (Flags on the Towers).
