250 | THE GULAG ARCHLPELAGO

humanely permitted to return home, although, even ‘without
aggravating circumstances, they deserved to be shot for having
surrendered. But people in this category celebrated prematurely!
Even before the former prisoner arrived home, his case ‘had
reached his home district through the secret channels of State
‘Security. These people remained eternally outsiders. And with
the first mass arrests, like those of 1948—1949, they were im—
mediately arrested for hostile propaganda or some other reason.
I was imprisoned with people in that category too.

"Oh, if I had only known!" That was the refrain in the prison
cells that spring. If I had only known that this was how I would
be greeted! That they would deceive me so! That this would ‘be
my fate! Would I have really returned to my Motherland? Not
for anything! I would have made my way to Switzerland, to
France! I would have gone across the sea, across the ocean!
Across three oceans!"

But the more thoughtful prisoners corrected them. They had
made their mistake earlier! They were stupid to have dashed off
to the front lines in 1941. It takes a fool to rush off to war! Right
from the start, they should have gotten themselves set up in the
rear. Somewhere quiet. Those who did are heroes now. And it
would have been an even surer thing just to desert. Almost cer—
tainly, one‘s skin would be whole. They didn‘t get ten years
either—but eight, or seven. And they weren‘t excluded from any
of the cushy jobs in camp. After all, a deserter was not regarded
as an enemy or a traitor ‘or a political prisoner. He was con—
sidered not a hostile factor but a friendly one, a monpolitical
offender, so to speak. That point of view aroused passionate

7. In actual fact, even when POW‘s actually knew what would happen to
them, they behaved in exactly the same way. Vasily Aleksandrov was taken
prisoner in Finland. He was sought out there by some elderly Petersburg
merchant who asked him his name and patronymic and then said: "In 1917 I
owed your grandfather a large debt, and I didn‘t have the chance to pay it.
Here you are—take it!" An old debt is a windfall! After the war Aleksandrov
was accepted by the circle of Russian émigrés, and he got engaged to a girl
there whom he came to love—and not just casually. To educate him, his future
father—in—law gave him a bound set of Pravda—just as it was issued from 1918
to 1941, without any deletions or corrections. At the same time, he recounted
to him more or less completely the history of the waves of arrests, as we have
set it forth in Chapter 2, above. And nevertheless . . . Aleksandrov abandoned
his fiancée, and his wealth, and returned to the U.S.S.R., where he was given,
as one can easily guess, fem years and disenfranchisement for five more. In 1953
he was happy to have managed to snag himself a job as foreman in a Special
Camp. —
