116 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

intoxication, signed the confession—and was shot. (Even one
tiny glass can have an enormous effect on a famished man—and
that was a whole carafe.)

27. Beatings—of a kind that leave no marks. They use rubber
truncheons, and they use wooden mallets and small sandbags. It
is very, very painful when they hit a bone—for example, an
interrogator‘s jackboot on the shin, where the bone lies just
beneath the skin. They beat Brigade Commander Karpunich—
Braven for twenty—one days in a row. And today he says: "Even
after thirty years all my bones ache—and my head too." In
recollecting his own experience and the stories of others, he
counts up to fifty—two methods of torture. Here is one: They
grip the hand in a special vise so that the prisoner‘s palm lies
flat on the desk—and then they hit the joints with the thin edge
of a ruler. And one screams! Should we single out particularly
the technique by which teeth are knocked out? They knocked
out eight of Karpunich‘s."

As everyone knows, a blow of the fist in the solar plexus,
catching the victim in the middle of a breath, leaves no mark
whatever. The Lefortovo Colonel Sidorov, in the postwar period,
used to take a "penalty kick" with his overshoes at the dangling
genitals of male prisoners. Soccer players who at one time or
another have been hit in the groin by a ball know what that kind
of blow is like. There is no pain comparable to it, and ordinarily
the recipient loses consciousness."

28. In the Novorossisk NKVD they invented a machine for
squeezing fingernails. As a result it could be observed later at
transit prisons that many of those from Novorossisk had lost
their fingernails.

29. And what about the strait jacket?

30. And breaking the prisoner‘s back? (As in that same Kha—
barovsk GPU in 1933.)

18. In the case of the Secretary of the Karelian Provincial Party Committee,
G. Kupriyanov, arrested in 1949, some of the teeth they knocked out were just
ordinary ones, of no particular account, but others were gold. At first they
gave him a receipt that said his gold teeth were being kept for him. And then
they caught themselves just in time and took away his receipt.

19. In 1918 the Moscow Revolutionary Tribunal convicted the former Tsarist
jailer Bondar. The most extreme measure of his cruelty that was cited was the
accusation that "in ore case he had struck a political prisoner with such force
that his eardrum had burst." (Krylenko, op. cit., p. 16.)
