96 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

mittee, part of the Commission on the Use of Natural Forces, was
shot. Familiar enough with the attitude and the mood of Russian
scientists at that time, and not being shut off from those years
by a smoke screen of fanaticism, we can, indeed, figure out, even
without archaeological excavations, the precise validity of that
case.

Here is what Y. Doyarenko remembers about 1921; the Lub—
yanka reception cell for those newly arrested, with forty to fifty
trestle beds, and women being brought in one after another all
night long. None of them knew what she was supposed to be
guilty of, and there was a feeling among them that people were
being arrested for no reason at all. Only one woman in the whole
cell knew why she was there—she was an SR. The first question
asked by Yagoda: "Well, what are you here for?" In other words,
you tell me, and help me cook up the case! And they say abso—
lutely the same thing about the Ryazan GPU in 1930! People all
felt they were being imprisoned for no reason. There was so little
on which to base a charge that they accused I. D. T v of
using a false name. (And even though his name was perfectly
real, they handed him three years via a Special Board—OSO——
under 58—10.) Not knowing what to pick on, the interrogator
asked: "What was your job?" Answer:; "A planner." The inter—
rogater: "Write me a statement that explains ‘planning at the
factory and how it is carried out.‘ After that I will let you know
why you‘ve been arrested." (He expected the explanation to pro—
vide the hook on which to hang a charge.)

Here is the way it went in the case of the Kovno Fortress in
1912: Since the fortress served no useful military purpose, it was
decided to eliminate it. At that point the fortress command,
thoroughly alarmed, arranged a "night attack" simply to prove its
usefulness and in order to stay where they were!

The theoretical view of the suspect‘s guilt was, incidentally,
quite elastic from the very beginning. In his instructions on the
use of Red Terror, the Chekist M. I. Latsis wrote: "In the inter—
rogation do not seek evidence and proof that the person accused
acted in word or deed against Soviet power. The first questions
should be: What is his class, what is his origin, what is his educa—
tion and upbringing? [There is your Sapropelite Committee for
you!] These are the questions which must determine the fate of

 
