482 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

to undress down to their underwear and to take off their shoes.
The floor was bare earth and dust (it might be wet dirt; and in
the Kazan Prison it might even be covered with water). Kozyrev
had a stool in his. (Ginzburg had none in hers.) He immediately
concluded that he would perish, that he would freeze to death.
But some kind of mysterious inner warmth gradually made itself
felt, and it was his salvation. He learned to sleep sitting on his
stool. They gave him a mug of hot water three times a day; it
made him drunk. One of the duty officers, in violation of the
rules, pressed a piece of sugar into his ten—and—a—half—ounce
bread ration. On the basis of the rations issued him, and by
observing the light from some faraway, tiny, labyrinthine window,
Kozyrev kept count of the days. His five days had come to an
end, but he had not been released. His sense of hearing had be—
come extremely acute and he heard whispers in the corridor—
having to do with either "the sixth" or "six days." This was a
provocation: they were waiting for him to say that his five days
were over and that it was time to let him out. That would have
constituted unruliness, for which his stay in the punishment cell
would have been prolonged. But he sat silent and obedient for
another day, and then they let him out, just as if everything had
been the way it was supposed to be. (Perhaps the chief of the
prison used this method for testing all the prisoners in turn for
submissiveness? And then he could sentence all those who
weren‘t yet submissive enough to further terms in the punishment
cell.) After the punishment cell the ordinary cell seemed like a
palace. Kozyrev became deaf for half a year, and he began to
get abscesses in his throat. His cellmate went insane from frequent
imprisonment in the punishment cell, and Kozyrevy was kept
locked up with an insane man for more than a year, with just
the two of them there. (Nadezhda Surovtseva recalls many cases
of insanity in political isolators—she herself recalls as many as
Novorussky totaled up in the whole chronicle of Schliisselburg. )

Does it not at this point seem to the reader that we have
gradually, step by step, mounted to the very point, the peak, of
the second horn—and that it is probably really higher than the
first? And probably sharper too?

But opinions are divided. With one voice the old camp veterans
consider the Vladimir TON of the fifties a resort. That is how
