558 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

I often have to blush at my recollections of my younger years
(and that‘s where my younger years were spent!). But whatever
casts you down also teaches you a lot. And it turned out that as a
residue of the officer‘s shoulder boards, which had trembled and
fluttered on my shoulders for two years in all, some kind of
poisonous golden dust had settled in the empty space between
my ribs. On that river wharf, which was a camplet too, there was
also a compound with watchtowers surrounding it. We were
merely transient, temporary work sloggers, and there had been
no talk at all, no rumor, that we might be allowed to stay and
serve out our terms there. But when they formed us up for the
first time, and the work—assignment foreman looked down the line
to pick out temporary work—brigade leaders, my worthless heart
was bursting under my woolen field shirt;: Me, me, pick me!

I was not chosen. But why did I want it? I would only have
made further shameful mistakes.

Oh, how hard it is to part with power! This one has to under—
stand.

There was a time when Krasnaya Presnya became the virtual
capital of Gulag—in the sense that no matter where you went,
you couldn‘t bypass it, just like Moscow. Just as when one travels
in the Soviet Union it is more convenient to proceed from Tash—
kent to Sochi and from Chernigov to Minsk via Moscow, they
dragged the prisoners there from all over and sent them off all
over via Presnya. And that was the way it was when I was there.
Presnya was at the point of breakdown from overcrowding. They
built a supplementary building. Only the through trains of cattle
cars carrying those who had been sentenced right at counterintel—
ligence bypassed Moscow on the circle line around it, which,
as it happened, went right past Presnya, perhaps even saluting it
with a whistle on the way.

But we do have a ticket when we come to Moscow as free
passengers in transit, and we hope sooner or later to proceed in
the desired direction. At Presnya at the end of the war and just
after, not only the prisoners who arrived there but even the very
highest—ranking officials and even the heads of Gulag itself were
