560 [ THE GULAG ARCHIPEL AGO

and whose hand one ought perhaps to grease (even if via the
storage room keeper), was worse than if his fortunes had simply
been determined blindly by a roll of the dice. This invisible and
unrealized opportunity—to go south to Nalchik instead of north
to Norilsk in return for a leather jacket, to go to Serebryanny
Bor outside Moscow instead of Taishet in Siberia for a couple of
pounds of fat bacon (and perhaps to lose both the leather jacket
and the fat bacon for nothing at all)—only aggravated and
fatigued tired souls. Maybe someone did manage to arrange it,
maybe someone got himself fixed up that way, but most blessed of
all were those who had nothing to give or who spared themselves
all that anxiety.

Submissiveness to fate, the total abdication of your own will in
the shaping of your life, the recognition that it was impossible to
guess the best and the worst ahead of time but that it was easy
to take a step you would reproach yourself for—all this freed the
prisoner from any bondage, made him calmer, and even ennobled
him.

And thus it was that the prisoners lay in rows in the cells, and
their fates lay in undisturbed piles in the rooms of the prison
office. And the assignment supervisors took the files from the par—
ticular corner where it was easiest to get at them. And some zeks
had to spend two or three months gasping in this accursed Presnya
while others would whiz through it with the speed of a shooting
star. As a result of all that congestion, haste, and disorder with
the cases, sometimes sentences got switched at Presnya (and at
other transit prisons as well). This didn‘t affect the 58‘s, because
their prison terms, in Maxim Gorky‘s phrase, were "Terms" with
a capital letter, were intended to be long, and even when they
seemed to be nearing their end they just never got there anyway.
But it made sense for big thieves and murderers to switch with
some stupid nonpolitical offender. And so they or their accom—
plices would inch up to such an individual and question him with
interest and concern. And he, not knowing that a short—termer
at a transit prison isn‘t supposed to disclose anything about him—
self, would innocently tell them that his name was, for example,
Vasily Parfenych Yevrashkin, that he was born in 1913, that he
lived in Semidubye and had been born there. And his term was
one year, Article 109, "Negligence." And then Yevrashkin was
