From Island to Island | 603

his sixth the Soviet Union. Since he was an ace he could certainly
not have avoided shooting down women and children from the
air! That made him a war criminal and he got a prison sentence
and a "muzzle" of five additional years. And, of course, there
had to be one right—thinking person (like Prosecutor Kretov) in
the cell: "They were right to imprison all you counterrevolu—
tionary bastards! History will grind up your bones for fertilizer!"
"You‘re going to be fertilizer yourself, you dog!" they shouted
back. "No, they will reconsider my case. I am innocent!" And the
whole cell howled and seethed. And a gray—haired Russian—
language teacher stood up on the bunks, barefoot, and wrung his
hands like a latter—day Jesus Christ: "Children of mine, make
peace with one another! My children!" And they howled at him
too: "Your children are in the Bryansk forests! We are nobody‘s
children! All we are is the sons of Gulag."

After dinner and the evening trip to the toilet, night cloaked
the window "muzzles" and the nagging electric lights below the
ceiling lit up. Day divided the prisoners and night drew them
closer together. There were no quarrels in the evening: lectures
and concerts were given. And in this, too, Timofeyev—Ressovsky
shone: he spent entire evenings on Italy, Denmark, Norway,
Sweden. The émigrés spoke about the Balkans, about France.
Someone delivered a lecture on Le Corbusier. Someone else
delivered one on the habits of bees. Someone else on Gogol. This
was when we smoked our lungs full. Smoke filled up the cell
and hovered in the air like a fog, and there was no draft to pull it
out the window because of the "muzzles." Kostya Kiula, twin to
me in age, round—faced, blue—eyed, amusingly awkward, stepped
up to the table and recited to us the verses he had composed in
prison." His voice broke with emotion. His verses were entitled,
"My First Food Parcel," "To My Wife," "To My Son." When in
prison you strain to get by ear verses written in prison, you don‘t
waste a single thought on whether the author‘s use of syllabic
stress is faulty and whether his lines end in assonances or full
rhymes. These verses are the blood of your own heart, the tears
of your own wife. The cell wept.

In that cell I myself set out to write verses about prison. And

2. Kostya Kiula doesn‘t respond, he‘s disappeared. I am afraid he is not
among the living.
