First Cell, First Love | 189

stuck in the craw of people whose deeds and actions were single—
minded and narrow—minded. And the only nickname they were
christened with was "rot." Because these people were a flower
that bloomed too soon and breathed too delicate a fragrance.
And so they were mowed down.

These people were particularly helpless in their personal lives:
they could neither bend with the wind, nor pretend, nor get by;
every word declared an opinion, a passion, a protest. And it was
just such people the mowing machine cut down, just such people
the chaff—cutter shredded.®

They had passed through these very same cells. But the cell
walls—for the wallpaper had long since been stripped off, and
they had been plastered, whitewashed, and painted more than
once—gave off nothing of the past. (On the contrary, the walls
now tried to listen to us with hidden microphones.) Nowhere is
anything written down or reported of the former inhabitants of
these cells, of the conversations held in them, of the thoughts
with which earlier inmates went forth to be shot or to imprison—
ment on the Solovetsky Islands. And now such a volume, which
would be worth forty freight car loads of our literature, will in
all probability never be written.

Those still alive recount to us all sorts of trivial details: that
there used to be wooden trestle beds here and that the mattresses
were stuffed with straw. That, way back in 1920, before they put
muzzles over the windows, the panes were whitewashed up to
the top. By 1923 "muzzles" had been installed (although we
unanimously ascribed them to Beria). They said that back in the
twenties, prison authorities had been very lenient toward pris—
oners communicating with each other by "knocking" on the walls:
this was a carry—over from the stupid tradition in the Tsarist
prisons that if the prisoners were deprived of knocking, they
would have no way to occupy their time. And another thing:
back in the twenties all the jailers were Latvians, from the
Latvian Red Army units and others, and the food was all handed
out by strapping Latvian women.

All this was trivial detail, but it was certainly food for thought.

I myself had needed very badly to get into this main Soviet

6. I am almost fearful of saying it, but it seems as though on the eve of the
1970‘s these people are emerging once again. That is surprising. It was almost
too much to hope for.
