252 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

Chiang Kai—shek. The first and only disaster of his earlier life
had occurred when his Second Shock Army, after being en—
circled, was ineptly abandoned to die of starvation. But how
much of that whole biography could be believed?®

8. As far as one can establish at this late date, Andrei Andreyevich Vlasov,
prevented by the Revolution from completing his studies at the Nizhni Nov—
gorod Orthodox Seminary, was drafted into the Red Army in 1919 and fought
as an enlisted man. On the southern front, against Denikin and Wrangel, he
rose to be commander of a platoon, then of a company. In the twenties he
completed the Vystrel courses, He became a member of the Communist Party
in 1930. In 1936, having attained the rank of regimental commander, he was
sent to China as a military adviser. Evidently he had no ties to the top military
and Party circles, and he therefore turned up naturally in that Stalinist "second
echelon" of officers promoted to replace the purged commanders of armies,
divisions, and brigades. From 1938 on he commanded a division. And in
1940, when "new" (in other words, old) officer ranks were created, he became
a major general. From additional information one can conclude that in that
corps of newly made generals, many of whom were totally stupid and inexperi—
enced, Vlasov was one of the most talented. His 99th Infantry Division, which ©
he had instructed and trained from the summer of 1940 on, was not caught
off balance by the German attack. On the contrary, while the rest of the army
reeled backward, his division advanced, retook Przemysl, and held it for six
days. Quickly skipping the rank of corps commander, in 1941 Lieutenant Gen—
eral Vlasov was in command of the Thirty—seventh Army near Kiev. He made
his way out of the enormous Kiev encirclement and in December, 1941, near
Moscow he commanded the Twentieth Army, whose successful Soviet counter—
offensive for defense of the capital (the taking of Solnechnogorsk) was noted
in the Sovinformburo communiqué for December 12. And the list of generals
mentioned there was as follows: Zhukov, Lelyushenko, Kuznetsov, Vlasov,
Rokossovsky, Govorov. Thanks to the speed with which officers were promoted
in those months, he became Deputy Commander of the Volkhov Front (under
Meretskov), and took over command of the Second Shock Army. On January
7, 1942, at the head of that army, he began a drive to break the Leningrad
blockade—an attack across the Volkhov River to the northwest. This had
been planned as a combined operation, a concerted push from several direc—
tions and from Leningrad itself. At scheduled intervals the Fifty—fourth, the
Fourth, and the Fifty—second armies were to take part in it also. But those
three armies either did not advance because they were unready or else came
to a quick halt. At that time we still didn‘t have the capacity to plan such
complex combined operations, and, more importantly, provide supplies for
them. Vlasov‘s Second Shock Army, however, was successful in its assault, and
by February, 1942, it was 46 miles deep inside the German lines! And from
then on, the reckless Stalinist Supreme Command could find neither men nor
ammunition to reinforce even those troops. (That‘s the kind of reserves they
had begun the offensive with!) Leningrad, too, was left to die behind the
blockade, having received no specific information from Novgorod. During
March the winter roads still held up. From April on, however, the entire
swampy area through which the Second Army had advanced melted into mud,
and there were no supply roads, and there was no help from the air. The army
was without food and, at the same time, Vlasov was refused permission to re—
treat. For two months they endured starvation and extermination. In the
Butyrki, soldiers from that army told me how they had cut off the hoofs of
dead and rotting horses and boiled the scrapings and eaten them. Then, on
May 14, a German attack was launched from all sides against the encircled
