90 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

Generalissimo into issuing the order to arrest all those cripples
over again, without any new charges! It was even disadvantageous,
both economically and politically, to clog the meat grinder with
its own refuse. But Stalin issued the order anyway. Here was a
case in which a historical personality simply behaved capriciously
toward historical necessity.

And so it was necessary to take all of them though they had
hardly had a chance to attach themselves to new places or new
families. They were rounded up with much the same weary in—
dolence they themselves now returned with. They knew before—
hand the whole way of the cross ahead. They did not ask "What
for?" And they did not say to their families: "I‘ll be back." They
put on their shabbiest rags, poured some makhorka into their
camp tobacco pouches, and went off to sign the deposition. (Only
one question: "Are you the one who was in prison?" "Yes." "Take
ten more." )

At this point the Autocrat decided it wasn‘t enough to arrest
just those who had survived since 1937! What about the children
of his sworn enemies? They, too, must be imprisoned! They were
growing up, and they might have notions of vengeance. (He may
have had a heavy dinner and had a nightmare about those chil—
dren.) They went through the lists, looked around, and arrested
children—but not very many. They arrested the children of the
purged army commanders, but not all the children of Trotskyites.
And so the wave of the vengeful children came into being.
(Among such children were seventeen—year—old Lena Kosaryeva
and thirty—five—year—old Yelena Rakovskaya.)

By 1948, after the great European displacement, Stalin had
succeeded once again in tightly barricading himself in and pulling
the ceiling down closer to him: in this reduced space he had re—
created the tension of 1937.

And so in 1948, 1949, and 1950 there flowed past:

e Alleged spies (ten years earlier they had been German
and Japanese, now they were Anglo—American).

e Believers (this wave non—Orthodox for the most part).

e Those geneticists and plant breeders, disciples of the late
Vavilov and of Mendel, who had not previously been arrested.

e Just plain ordinary thinking people (and students, with
particular severity) who had not been sufficiently scared away
