76 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

Another peasant, with six children, met a different fate. Be—
cause he had six mouths to feed he devoted himself whole—
heartedly to collective farm work, and kept hoping he would get
some return for his labor. And he did—they awarded him a deco—
ration. They awarded it at a special assembly, made speeches. In
his reply, the peasant got carried away. He said, "Now if I could
just have a sack of flour instead of this decoration! Couldn‘t I
somehow?" A wolflike laugh rocketed through the hall, and the
newly decorated hero went off to exile, together with all six of
those dependent mouths.

Should we wrap it all up and simply say that they arrested the
innocent? But we omitted saying that the very concept of guilt
had been repealed by the proletarian revolution and, at the be— |
ginning of the thirties, was defined as rightist opportunism!*
So we can‘t even discuss these out—of—date concepts, guilt and
innocence.

The reverse wave of 1939 was an unheard—of incident in the
history of the Organs, a blot on their record! But, in fact, this
reverse wave was not large; it included about 1 to 2 percent of
those who had been arrested but not yet convicted, who had not
yet been sent away to far—off places and had not yet perished.
It was not large, but it was put to effective use. It was like giving
back one kopeck change from a ruble, but it was necessary in
order to heap all the blame on that dirty Yezhov, to strengthen the
newcomer, Beria, and to cause the Leader himself to shine more
brightly. With this kopeck they skillfully drove the ruble right
into the ground. After all, if "they had sorted things out and
freed some people" (and even the newspapers wrote intrepidly
about individual cases of persons who had been slandered), it
meant that the rest of those arrested were indeed scoundrels! And
those who returned kept silent. They had signed pledges not to
speak out. They were mute with terror. And there were very few
who knew even a little about the secrets of the Archipelago. The
distinction was as before: Black Marias at night and demonstra—
tions by day.

But for that matter they soon took that kopeck back—during

39. Vyshinsky, op. cit.
