510 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

"You stinking shit! You counterrevolutionary! You ought to
be hanged, and you have the nerve to demand that the bread
ration be reweighed! You rat—the Soviet government gives you
food and drink, and you have the brass to be dissatisfied? Do you
know what you‘re going to get for that?"

Orders to the guard: "Take him out!" The lock rattles. "Come
on out, you! Hands behind your back!" They bring out the un—
fortunate.

"Now who else is dissatisfied? Who else wants his bread ration
reweighed?"

(And it‘s not as if you could prove anything anyway. It‘s not
as if they‘d take your word against the lieutenant‘s if you were
to complain somewhere that there were only nine ounces instead
of twenty.)

It‘s quite enough to show a well—beaten dog the whip. All the
rest turned out to be satisfied, and that was how the penalty
ration was confirmed for all the days of the long journey. And they
began to withhold the sugar too. The convoy had appropriated it.

(And this took place during the summer of our two great vic—
tories—over Germany and Japan—victories which embellish the
history of our Fatherland and which our grandsons and great—
grandsons will learn about in school.)

The prisoners went hungry for a day and then a second day,
by which time several of them began to get a bit wiser, and Sanin
said to his compartment: "Look, fellows: If we go on this way,
we‘re lost. Come on now, all of you who have some good stuff
with you, let me have it, and I‘ll trade it for something to eat."
With great self—assurance he accepted some articles and turned
down others. (Not all the prisoners were willing to let their
things go—and, you see, no one forced them to either.) And then
he and Merezhkov asked to be allowed to leave the compartment,
and, strangely enough, the convoy let them out. Taking the things,
they went off toward the compartment of the convoy guard, and
they returned from there with sliced loaves of bread and with
makhorka. These very loaves constituted the eleven ounces miss—
ing from the daily rations. Now, however, they were not dis—
tributed on an equal basis but went only to those who had handed
over their belongings.

And that was quite fair: after all, they had all admitted they
