The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 69

chairman, the deputy, all eleven department chiefs, all the chief
accountants, all the chief economists. The only people left at
liberty were ordinary accountants, stenographers, charwomen,
and messengers. . . .

In the arrest of rank—and—file members of the Party there was
evidently a hidden theme not directly stated anywhere in the
indictments and verdicts: that arrests should be carried out
predominantly among Party members who had joined before
1924. This was pursued with particular rigor in Leningrad, be—
cause all of them there had signed the "platform" of the New
Opposition. (And how could they have refused to sign? How
could they have refused to "trust" their Leningrad Provincial
Party Committee?)

Here is one vignette from those years as it actually occurred.
A district Party conference was under way in Moscow Province.
_It was presided over by a new secretary of the District Party
Committee, replacing one recently arrested. At the conclusion
of the conference, a tribute to Comrade Stalin was called for.
Of course, everyone stood up (just as everyone had leaped to
his feet during the conference at every mention of his name).
The small hall echoed with "stormy applause, rising to an ova—
tion." For three minutes, four minutes, five minutes, the "stormy
applause, rising to an ovation," continued. But palms were getting
sore and raised arms were already aching. And the older people
were panting from exhaustion. It was becoming insufferably silly
even to those who really adored Stalin. However, who would
dare be the first to stop? The secretary of the District Party
Committee could have done it. He was standing on the platform,
and it was he who had just called for the ovation. But he was a
newcomer. He had taken the place of a man who‘d been arrested.
He was afraid! After all, NKVD men were standing in the hall
applauding and watching to see who quit first! And in that ob—
scure, small hall, unknown to the Leader, the applause went on
—six, seven, eight minutes! They were done for! Their goose
was cooked! They couldn‘t stop now till they collapsed with
heart attacks! At the rear of the hall, which was crowded, they
could of course cheat a bit, clap less frequently, less vigorously,
not so eagerly—but up there with the presidium where everyone
could see them? The director of the local paper factory, an
