484 | THEB GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

But our peevish qualifications somehow interrupt our line of
thought. The plan of our chapter creaks and cracks, and we no
longer know the answer to the question: Is the soul of a person
in the New Type Prison, in the Special Purpose Prison (the
TON), purified or does it perish once and for all?

If the first thing you see each and every morning is the eyes
of your cellmate who has gone insane, how then shall you
save yourself during the coming day? Nikolai Aleksandrovich
Kozyrev, whose brilliant career in astronomy was interrupted by
his arrest, saved himself only by thinking of the eternal and in—
finite: of the order of the Universe—and of its Supreme Spirit;
of the stars; of their internal state; and what Time and the pass—
ing of Time really are.

And in this way he began to discover a new field in physics.
And only in this way did he succeed in surviving in the Dmi—
trovsk Prison. But his line of mental exploration was blocked by
forgotten figures. He could not build any further—he had to have
a lot of figures. Now just where could he get them in his solitary—
confinement cell with its overnight kerosene lamp, a cell into
which not even a little bird could enter? And the scientist prayed:
"Please, God! I have done everything I could. Please help me!
Please help me continue!"

At this time he was entitled to receive one book every ten
days (by then he was alone in the cell). In the meager prison
library were several different editions of Demyan Beduny‘s Red
Concert, which kept coming around to each cell again and
again. Half an hour passed after his prayer; they came to ex—
change his book; and as usual, without asking anything at all,
they pushed a book at him. It was entitled 4 Course in Astro—
physics! Where had it come from? He simply could not imagine
such a book in the prison library. Aware of the brief duration of
this coincidence, Kozyrev threw himself on it and began to mem—
orize everything he needed immediately, and everything he
might need later on. In all, just two days had passed, and he had
eight days left in which to keep his book, when there was an
unscheduled inspection by the chief of the prison. His eagle eye
noticed immediately. "But you are an astronomer?" "Yes." "Take
this book away from him!" But its mystical arrival had opened the
way for his further work, which he then continued in the camp
in Norilsk.
