444 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

on him, and then, if the prisoner shouted down the nighttime
corridor, "Farewell, brothers!" crammed a rolled—up rag into
his mouth—just why should he tell you about it? He is probably
still walking around Leningrad, well dressed. But if you happen
to run into him in a beer parlor on the islands or at a soccer
game, ask him!)

However, even the executioner doesn‘t know about everything
right to the very end. While a motor roars its accompaniment,
he fires his pistol bullets, unheard, into the back of a head, and
he is himself stupidly condemned not to understand what he has
done. He doesn‘t know about the very end! Only those who have
been killed know it all to the very end—and that means no one.

It‘s true, however, that the artist, however obliquely and un—
clearly, nevertheless knows some part of what happens right up
to the actual bullet, the actual noose.

So we are going to construct—from artists and from those
who were pardoned—an approximate picture of the death cell.
We know, for example, that they do not sleep at night but lie
there waiting. That they calm down again only in the morning.

Narokov (Marchenko) in his novel, Imaginary Values," a
work much spoiled by the author‘s self—assigned task of describ—
ing everything as though he were Dostoyevsky, of tearing at the
reader‘s heartstrings and trying to move him even more than
Dostoyevsky, nevertheless in my opinion described the death
cell and the scene of the execution itself very well. One cannot
verify it, of course, but somehow one believes it.

The interpretations of earlier artists, for example, Leonid
Andreyev, seem today somehow to belong willy—nilly to Krylov‘s
time, a century and a half ago. And for that matter, what
fantasist could have imagined the death cells of 1937? Of neces—
sity, he would have woven his psychological threads: what it was
like to wait, how the condemned man kept listening, and the like.
But who could have foreseen and described such unexpected
sensations on the part of prisoners condemned to death as:

1. Prisoners awaiting execution suffered from the cold. They
had to sleep on the cement floor under the windows, where it
was 28 degrees Fahrenheit. (Strakhovich.) You could freeze to
death while you were waiting to be shot.

8. N. Narokov, Mnimyye Velichiny, Roman v 2—kh Chastyakh (Imaginary
Values; a Novel in Two Parts), New York, Chekhov Publishing House, 1952.
