390 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

cause he had been so busy with his teaching and with developing
new sciences—such as the science of the organization of produc—
tion and the scientific principles of rationalization. I recall from
my own childhood the engineering professors of those years, and
that‘s exactly what they were like. Their evenings were given
up to their students at all levels, and they didn‘t get home to
their families until 11 P.M. After all, at the beginning of the
Five—Year Plan there were only thirty thousand of them for the
whole country. They were all strained to the breaking point.

And it was these people who were supposed to have con—
trived a crisis, to have spied in exchange for handouts?

Ramzin uttered just one honest phrase during the whole trial:
"The path of wrecking is alien to the inner structure of engineer—
ing."

Throughout the trial Krylenko forced the defendants to con—
cede apologetically that they were "scarcely conversant" with or
were "illiterate" in politics. After all, politics is much more diffi—
cult and much loftier than some kind of metallurgy or turbine
design. In politics your head won‘t help you, nor will your educa—
tion. Come on! Answer me! What was your attitude toward the
October Revolution when it happened? Skeptical. In other words,
immediately hostile. Why? Why? Why?

EKrylenko hounded them with his theoretical questions—and
as a result of simple human slips of the tongue inconsistent with
their assigned roles, the nucleus of the truth is disclosed to us—
as to what really had taken place and from what the entire bubble
had been blown.

What the engineers had first seen in the October coup d‘état
was ruin. (And for three years there had truly been ruin and
nothing else.) Beyond that, they had seen the loss of even the
most elementary freedoms. (And these freedoms never returned.)
How, then, could engineers not have wanted a democratic repub—
lic? How could engineers accept the dictatorship of the workers,
the dictatorship of their subordinates in industry, so little skilled
or trained and comprehending neither the physical nor the eco—
nomic laws of production, but now occupying the top positions,
from which they supervised the engineers? Why shouldn‘t the
engineers have considered it more natural for the structure of
society to be headed by those who could intelligently direct its
activity? (And, excepting only the question of the moral leader—
