226 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

army was worn do.\gyn bled white, poorly supplied, and, most
importantly, that it would not fight with its usual determination
against the Allies. I, however, insisted, on the basis of the units
I had been familiar with, that the army was not so much worn
down as experienced, that it had now become both strong and
mean, and that in such an event it would crush the Allies even
* more thoroughly than it had the Germans. "Never," cried Yuri
in a half—whisper. "And what about the Ardennes?" I answered
in a half—whisper. Fastenko interrupted us, ridiculing us both,
informing us that we did not understand the West and that no
‘one, now or ever, could compel the Allied armies to fight against
us.

_ However,— in the evening we didn‘t want to argue so much as
to hear something interesting that might bring us closer together,
and to talk in a spirit of fellowship.

One favorite sub]ect of conversation was prison tradltlons,
how it used to be in prison. We had Fastenko and were therefore
able to hear these stories at first hand. What dismayed us most of
all was to learn that it had previously been an honor to be a
political prisoner, and that it was not only their relatives who
stuck by them and refused to renounce them, but that girls who
had never even met them came to visit them, pretending for that
purpose to be their fiancées. And what about the once universal
tradition of gifts for the prisoners on holidays? No one in Russia
ever broke the Lenten fast without first taking gifts for unknown
prisoners to the common prison kitchen. They brought in Christ—
mas hams, tarts, and kulichi—the special Russian Easter cakes.
One poor old lady even used to bring a dozen colored Easter
eggs; it made her feel better. And where had all that Russian
generosity gone? It had been replaced by political consciousness.
That was how cruelly and implacably they had terrified our
people and cured them of taking thought for and caring for
those who ‘were suffering. Today it would seem silly to do such
a thing. If it was proposed today that some institution organize
a preholiday collection of gifts for prisoners in the local prison,
it would be virtually considered an anti—Soviet revolt! That‘s how
_ far we have gone along the road to being brutalized!

And what about those holiday gifts? Were they only a matter
of tasty food? More importantly, those gifts gave the prisoners
