84 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

Within the over—all wave of those from formerly occupied areas,
there followed, one after another, the quick and compact waves
of the nationalities which had transgressed:

e In 1943, the Kalmyks, Chechens, Ingush, and Balkars.
e In 1944, the Crimean Tatars.

They would not have been pushed out into eternal exile so
energetically and swiftly had it not been that regular army units
and military trucks were assigned to help the Organs. The military
units gallantly surrounded the auls, or settlements, and, within
twenty—four hours, with the speed of a parachute attack, those
who had nested there for centuries past found themselves removed
to railroad stations, loaded by the trainload, and rushed off to
Siberia, Kazakhstan, Central Asia, and the Russian North. Within
one day their land and their property had been turned over to
their "heirs."

What had happened to the Germans at the beginning of the
war now happened to these nationalities: they were exiled solely
on the basis of blood. There was no filling out of questionnaires;
Party members, Heroes of Labor, and heroes of the still—unfinished
war were all sent along with the rest.

During the last years of the war, of course, there was a wave
of German war criminals who were selected from the POW
camps and transferred by court verdict to the jurisdiction of
Gulag.

In 1945, even though the war with Japan didn‘t last three
weeks, great numbers of Japanese war prisoners were raked in
for urgent construction projects in Siberia and Central Asia, and
the same process of selecting war criminals for Gulag was carried
out among them.*

At the end of 1944, when our army entered the Balkans, and
especially in 1945, when it reached into Central Europe, a wave
of Russian émigrés flowed through the channels of Gulag. Most
were old men, who had left at the time of the Revolution, but
there were also young people, who had grown up outside Russia.
They usually dragged off the menfolk and left the women and

44. Without knowing the details, I am nevertheless convinced that a great
many of these Japanese could not have been sentenced legitimately., It was an

act of revenge, as well as a means of holding onto manpower for as long a
period as possible.
