224 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

At long last our Lubyanka lunch arrived. Long before it got
to us we could hear the cheery clatter in the corridor, and then,
as in a restaurant, they brought in a tray with two aluminum
plates—not bowls—for each prisoner. One plate held a ladleful
of soup and the other a ladleful of the thinnest kind of thin gruel,
with no fat in it.

In his first excitement, a prisoner couldn‘t get anything down
his throat. There were those who didn‘t touch their bread for
several days, who didn‘t know where to put it. But gradually
one‘s appetite returned; and then a chronically famished state
ensued that became almost uncontrollable. Then, if one managed
to get it under control, one‘s stomach shrank and adapted itself
to inadequate food, at which point the meager Lubyanka fare
became just right. One needed to have self—control to achieve
this, and also needed to stop looking around to see who might
be eating something extra. All those extremely dangerous prison
conversations about food had to be outlawed, and one had to
try to lift oneself, as far as possible, into higher spheres. At the
Lubyanka this was made easier by our being permitted two hours
of rest after Iunch—something else that was astonishingly resort—
like. We lay down, our backs to the peephole, set up open books
for appearance‘ sake, and dozed off. Sleep was forbidden, strictly
speaking, and the guards could see that the pages of the books
hadn‘t been turned for a long time. But ordinarily they did not
knock during this period. (The explanation for this humanitarian—
ism was that whoever wasn‘t resting during these hours was under—
going interrogation. Thus, for those who were stubborn, who
had not signed the depositions, the contrast was unmistakable:
they returned to the cell at the very end of the rest period.)

And sleep was the very best thing for hunger and anguish.
One‘s organism cooled off, and the brain stopped recapitulating
one‘s mistakes over and over again.

Then they brought in dinner—another ladle of gruel. Life was
setting all its gifts before you. After that, you were not going to
get anything to eat in the five or six hours before bedtime, but
that was not so terrible; it was easy to get used to not eating in
