Tyurzak | 475

were remembered outside in freedom only as something belong—
ing to the past—the distant past. And young people hadn‘t the
slightest idea that SR‘s and Mensheviks were still alive some—
where. And in the sequence of Chimkent and Cherdyn exile, and
the Verkhne—Uralsk and Vladimir isolators—how could they
not tremble in their dark solitary—confinement cells, cells with
"muzzles" by this time, and feel that perhaps their program
and their leaders had been mistaken, that perhaps their tactics
and actions had been mistaken too? And all their actions began
to seem nothing but inaction—and their lives, devoted only to
suffering, a fatal delusion.

Their lonely prison struggle had been essentially undertaken
for all of us, for all future prisoners (even though they themselves
might not think so, nor understand this), for how we would exist
in imprisonment and how we would be kept there. And if they
had won out, then probably nothing of what happened to us
would have happened, nothing of what this book is about, all
seven of its parts.

But they were beaten. They failed to protect either themselves
or us.

In part, too, the canopy of loneliness spread over them because,
in the very first postrevolutionary years, having naturally accepted
from the GPU the well—merited identification of politicals, they
naturally agreed with the GPU that all who were "to the right""*
of them, beginning with the Cadets, were not politicals but KR‘s
—Counter—Revolutionaries—the manure of history. And they
also regarded as KR‘s those who suffered for their faith in
Christ. And whoever didn‘t know what "right" or "left" meant
—and that, in the future, would be all of us—they considered
to be KR‘s also. And thus it was that, in part voluntarily, in
part involuntarily, keeping themselves aloof and shunning others,
they gave their blessing to the future "Fifty—eight" into whose
maw they themselves would disappear.

Objects and actions change their aspect quite decisively de—
pending on the position of the observer. In this chapter we have
been describing the prison stand of the socialists from their
point of view. And, as you see, it is illuminated by a pure and
tragic light. But those KR‘s whom the politicals treated so con—

14. I do not like these "left" and "right" classifications; they are conditional
concepts, they are loosely bandied about, and they do not convey the essence.
