170 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

read my "War Diary," which contained the stories he‘d told me.
When I was rehabilitated in 1957, I very much wanted to find him.
I remembered his village address and wrote once, and then again,
but there was no reply. I discovered one thread I could follow—
that he had graduated from the Yaroslavl Pedagogical Institute.
When I inquired there, they replied: "He was sent to work in the
Organs of State Security." Fine! All the more interesting! I wrote
to him at his city address, but there was no reply. Several years
passed and Ivan Denisovich was published. Well, I thought, now
he‘ll turn up. No! Three years later I asked one of my Yaroslavl
correspondents to go to him and personally hand him a letter. My
correspondent did as I asked and wrote me: "Evidently he has
never read Ivan Denisovich." And truly, why should they know
how things go with prisoners after they‘ve been sentenced? This
time Ovsyannikov couldn‘t keep silent any longer. He wrote:
"After the Institute they offered me work in the Organs, and it
seemed to me I would be just as successful there." (What did he
mean, successful?) "I cannot say that I have prospered remark—
ably in my new walk of life. There are some things I did not like,
but I work hard, and, if I am not mistaken, I shall not let my
comrades down." (And that‘s the justification—comradeship!)
He ended: "I no longer think about the future."

And that is all. Allegedly, he had not received my previous
letters. Evidently, he doesn‘t want to see me. (But if we had met,
I think this would have been a better chapter.) In Stalin‘s last
years he had already become an interrogator—during those very
years when they handed out a twenty—five—year sentence to every—
one who came along. How did everything in his consciousness
recircuit itself? How did everything black out? But remembering
the once selfless, dedicated boy, as fresh as spring water, can I
possibly believe that everything in him changed beyond recall,
that there are no living tendrils left?

When the interrogator Goldman gave Vera Korneyeva the
"206" form on nondisclosure to sign, she began to catch on to
her rights, and then she began to go into the case in detail, involv—
ing as it did all seventeen members of their "religious group.".
Goldman raged, but he had to let her study the file. In order not
to be bored waiting for her, he led her to a large office, where
half a dozen employees were sitting, and left her there. At first
