256 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

Russian captivity, as in German captivity, the worst lot of all
was reserved for the Russians.

In general, this war revealed to us that the worst thing in the
world was to be a Russian.

I recall with shame an incident I observed during the liquida—
tion—in other words, the plundering—of the Bobruisk encircle—
ment, when I was walking along the highway among wrecked
and overturned German automobiles, and a wealth of booty lay
scattered everywhere. German cart horses wandered aimlessly
in and out of a shallow depression where wagons and automo—
biles that had gotten stuck were buried in the mud, and bonfires
of booty were smoking away. Then J heard a cry for help: "Mr.
Captain! Mr. Captain!" A prisoner on foot in German britches
was crying out to me in pure Russian. He was naked from the
waist up, and his face, chest, shoulders, and back were all
bloody, while a sergeant osobist, a Security man, seated on a
horse, drove him forward with a whip, pushing him with his
horse. He kept lashing that naked back up and down with the
whip, without letting him turn around, without letting him ask
for help. He drove him along, beating and beating him, raising
new crimson welts on his skin.

And this was not one of the Punic Wars, nor a war between
the Greeks and the Persians! Any officer, possessing any author—
ity, in any army on earth ought to have stopped that senseless
torture. In any army on earth, yes, but in ours? Given our fierce
and uncompromising method of dividing mankind? (If you are
not with us, if you are not our own, etc., then you deserve nothing
but contempt and annihilation.) So I was afraid to defend the
Vlasov man against the osobist. 7 said nothing and I did nothing.
I passed him by as if I could not hear him . . . so that I myself
would not be infected by that universally recognized plague.
(What if the Vlasov man was indeed some kind of supervillain?
Or maybe the osobist would think something was wrong with
me? And then?) Or, putting it more simply for anyone who
knows anything about the situation in the Soviet Army at that
time: would that osobist have paid any attention to an army
captain?

So the osobist continued to lash the defenseless man brutally
and drive him along like a beast.

This picture will remain etched in my mind forever. This, after
