The Law Matures | 387

would name names) or of the groups from various branches
of industry. There seemed even to be some dearth of members.
As Charnovsky said, "There never was any formal organization
of a Promparty." And how many members had there been?
Larichev: "A count of members would have been difficult; the
exact composition was unknown." And how had they carried
out their wrecking? How had directives been communicated?
Well, it was just a matter of whoever met whomever in some
particular institution—directives were passed on orally. From
then on everyone would carry out his own wrecking on his own
conscience. (Well, now, Ramzin confidently named two thou—
sand members. And whenever he named two, they arrested five.
According to the documents in the trial, there were altogether
thirty to forty thousand engineers throughout the U.S.S.R. That
meant they would arrest every seventh one, and terrify the other
six.) And what about contacts with the Working Peasants Party?
Well, they might meet in the State Planning Commission, or else
in the Supreme Council of the Economy, and "plan systematic
acts against village Communists."

Where have we seen all this before? Aha! In Aida. They are
seeing Radames off on his campaign, and the orchestra is thun—
dering, and eight warriors are standing there in helmets and with
spears—and two thousand more are painted on the backdrop.

That‘s your Promparty.

But that‘s all right. It works. The show goes on! (Today it is
quite impossible to believe just how threatening and serious it all
looked at the time.) And it is hammered in by repetition, and
every individual episode is gone over several times. And be—
cause of this the awful visions multiply. And, in addition, so that
things won‘t become too bland, the defendants suddenly "forget"
something terribly unimportant, or else they "try to renounce
testimony"—and right then and there "they pin them down with
cross—questioning," and it all winds up being as lively as the
Moscow Art Theatre.

But Krylenko pressed too hard. On the one hand he planned
to disembowel the Promparty—to disclose its social basis. That
was a question of class, and his analysis couldn‘t go wrong. But
Krylenko abandoned the Stanislavsky method, didn‘t assign the
roles, relied on improvisation. He let everyone tell his own story
