282 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

Vul, and Vasilyev? Yes, and what a word it was, in fact—
troika! It bore a slight hint of sleigh bells on the shaft bow; the
celebration of Shrovetide; and, interwoven with all this, a
mystery. Why "troika"? What did it mean? After all, a court
wasn‘t a quartet either! And a Troika wasn‘t a court! And the
biggest mystery of all lay in the fact that it was kept out of sight.
We hadn‘t been there. We hadn‘t seen it. All we got was a piece
of paper. Sign here! The Troika was even more frightening than
a Revolutionary Tribunal. It set itself even farther apart, muffled
itself up, locked itself in a separate room, and—soon—concealed
the names of its members. Thus we grew used to the idea that the
Troika members didn‘t eat or drink or move about among
ordinary people. Once they had isolated themselves in order to
go into session, they were shut off for good, and all we knew of
them were the sentences handed out through typists. (And they
had to be returned too. Such documents couldn‘t be left in the
hands of individuals!)

These Troikas (we use the plural just in case, because—as
with a deity—we never know where or in what form it exists)
satisfied a persistent need that had arisen: never to allow those
arrested to return to freedom (This was like an OTK—a De—
partment for Quality Control in industry—but in this case it was
attached to the GPU—to prevent any spoiled goods.) If it turned
out that someone was innocent and could therefore not be tried
at all, then let him have his "minus 32" via the Troika—which
meant he couldn‘t live in any of the provincial capitals—or let
him spend two or three years in exile, after which he would have
a convict‘s clipped ear, would always be a marked man, and, from
then on, a recidivist.

(Please forgive us, reader. We have once more gone astray with
this rightist opportunism—this concept of "guilt," and of the
guilty or innocent. It has, after all, been explained to us that the
heart of the matter is not personal guilt, but social danger. One
can imprison an innocent person if he is socially hostile. And one
can release a guilty man if he is socially friendly. But lacking legal
training, we can be forgiven, for the 1926 Code, according to
which, my good fellow, we lived for twenty—five years and more,
was itself criticized for an "impermissible bourgeois approach,"
for an "insufficiently class—conscious approach," and for some
