414 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

they acted while still in freedom and still at the height of honor
and power, then they could certainly be depended on to follow
the script of the play faultlessly when their body, their food,
and their sleep were in the hands of the Lubyanka prompters.

And what did Bukharin fear most in those months before
his arrest? It is reliably known that above all he feared expulsion
from the Party! Being deprived of the Party! Being left alive but
outside the Party! And Dear Koba had played magnificently on
this trait of his (as he had with them all) from the very moment
he had himself become the Party. Bukharin (like all the rest
of them) did not have his own individual point of view. They
didn‘t have their own genuine ideology of opposition, on the
strength of which they could step aside and on which they could
take their stand. Before they became an opposition, Stalin de—
clared them to be one, and by this move he rendered them power—
less. And all their efforts were directed toward staying in the
Party. And toward not harming the Party at the same time!

These added up to too many different obligations for them to
be independent.

In essence, Bukharin had been allotted the starring role, and
nothing was to be overlooked or abridged in the Producer‘s work
with him, in the working of time on him, and in his own getting
used to the role. Even sending him to Europe the previous win—
ter to acquire manuscripts by Marx had been essential—not just
superficially, for the sake of the whole network of accusations
about his establishing contacts, but so that the aimless freedom
of life on tour might all the more insistently demand his return
to the main stage. And now, beneath black thunderclouds of
accusations, came the long, the interminable state of nonarrest, of
exhausting housebound lethargy, which ground down the will
power of the victim even more effectively than the direct pressure
of the Lubyanka. (Nor would the Lubyanka run away either—
it, too, would last for a year.)

On one occasion, Bukharin was summoned by Kaganovich,
who arranged a confrontation between him and Sokolnikov in
the presence of high—ranking Chekists. Sokolnikov gave testimony
about "the parallel Rightist Center" (parallel, in other words, to
that of the Trotskyites), and about Bukharin‘s underground
activity. Kaganovich conducted the interrogation aggressively
