In the Engine Room | 297

been very active at first, was soon abandoned. He dropped it
before it got far enough to produce an irreversible change; which
meant that things were left where they had been.

On that occasion, several veterans of the bench, all speaking up
at the same time, gave voice to their recollections, unwittingly
providing me with material for this chapter. (Oh, if only they
had undertaken to remember and to publish! But the years pass;
another five have gone by; and it has not become any brighter or
lighter.) They recalled how certain judges, at conferences of their
judicial colleagues, took pride when they spoke from the rostrum
of having succeeded in not applying Article 51 of the Criminal
Code, which specifies those circumstances that extenuate guilt,
and thus had succeeded in handing down sentences of twenty—five
years instead of ten. And how the courts had been humiliatingly
subservient to the Organs. A certain judge was trying a case. A
Soviet citizen who had returned from the United States had made
the slanderous statement that there were good automobile roads
in America—and nothing else. That was all there was to the case.
The judge ventured to send the case back for further investiga—
tion for the purpose of getting "genuine anti—Soviet materials"—
in other words, so that the accused could be beaten and tortured.
But his praiseworthy intention wasn‘t taken into account. The
angry answer came back: "You mean you don‘t trust our
Organs?" And, in the upshot, the judge was exiled to the post
of secretary of a military tribunal on Sakhalin‘ (Under Khru—
shchev, reproof was not so severe; judges who "made mistakes"
were sent—where do you think?—to work as lawyers.)" The
prosecutor‘s office was just as subservient to the Organs. When,
in 1942, Ryumin‘s flagrant abuses in the counterintelligence sec—
tion of the Northern Fleet became known, the prosecutor‘s office
did not dare interfere on its own, but only reported respectfully
to Abakumov that his boys were acting up. Abakumov had good
reason to consider the Organs the salt of the earth! (This was the
occasion when he called in Ryumin and promoted him—to his
own eventual undoing.)

There just wasn‘t enough time that February day, or they

12. Izvestiya, June 9, 1964. This throws an interesting light on views of legal
defense! In 1918, V. I. Lenin demanded that judges who handed down sentences
that were too lenient be excluded from the Party.
