The Ships of the Archipelago | 491

The zak car—what a foul abbreviation it is! As, for that matter,
are all the executioners‘ abbreviations. They meant to indicate
that this was a railroad car for prisoners—for zaklyuchennye.
But nowhere, except in prison documents, has this term caught
on and stuck. The prisoners got used to calling this kind of rail—
road car a Stolypin car, or, more simply, just a Stolypin.

As rail travel was introduced more widely in our Fatherland,
prisoner transports changed their form. Right up to the nineties
of the last century the Siberian prisoner transports moved on
foot or by horse cart. As far back as 1896, Lenin traveled to
Siberian exile in an ordinary third—class passenger car (with
free people all around him) and shouted to the train crew that
it was intolerably crowded. The painting by Yaroshenko which
everyone knows, Life Is Everywhere, shows a fourth—class pas—
senger car re—equipped in very naive fashion for prisoner trans—
port: everything has been left just as it was, and the prisoners
are traveling just like ordinary people, except that double grat—
ings have been installed on the windows. Cars of this type were
used on Russian railroads for a very long time. And certain people
remember being transported as prisoners in just such cars in
1927, except that the men and women were separated. On the
other hand, the SR Trushin recalls that even during Tsarist times
he was transported as a prisoner in a "Stolypin" car, except that
—once again going back to legendary times—there were six
people in a compartment.

Probably this type of railroad car really was first used under
Stolypin, in other words before 1911. And in the general Cadet
revolutionary embitterment, they christened it with his name.
However, it really became the favorite means of prisoner transport
only in the twenties; and it became the universal and exclusive
means only from 1930 on, when everything in our life became
uniform. Therefore it would be more correct to call it a Stalin
car rather than a Stolypin car. But we aren‘t going to argue with
the Russian language here.

The Stolypin car is an ordinary passenger car divided into
compartments, except that five of the nine compartments are
allotted to the prisoners (here, as everywhere in the Archipelago,
half of everything goes to the auxiliary personnel, the guards),
and compartments are separated from the corridor not by a solid
