The Ports of the Archipelago | 545

zles" on them and you can‘t look in, but from inside, hoarse,
friendly voices advise: "Hey, fellows! You know what they do
here? When they search you, they take away everything loose like
tea and tobacco. If you have any, toss it in here, through our
window. We‘ll give it back later." So what do you know? We are
suckers and rabbits. Maybe they do take tea and tobacco away.
We have read about universal prisoner solidarity in all our great
literature, that one prisoner won‘t deceive another. The way they
spoke to us was friendly. "Hey, fellows!" And so we toss them our
tobacco pouches. And the genuine pure—bred thieves on the other
side catch them and guffaw: "You Fascist stupes."

And here are the slogans with which the whole transit prison
welcomes us even though they don‘t actually hang them on the
walls: "Don‘t look for justice here!" "You‘re going to have to
hand over everything you‘ve got to us." "You‘ll have to give it
all up." This is repeated to you by the jailers, the convoy, and the
thieves. You are overwhelmed by your unbearable prison term,
and you are trying to figure out how to catch your breath, while
everyone around you is figuring out how to plunder you. Every—
thing works out so as to oppress the political prisoner, who is
already depressed and abandoned without all that. "You will
have to give it all up." The jailer at the Gorky Transit Prison
shakes his head hopelessly; and with a sense of relief, Ans Bern—
shtein gives him his officer‘s greatcoat—not free, but in exchange
for two onions. And why should you complain about the thieves
if you see all the jailers at Krasnaya Presnya wearing chrome—
leather boots they were never issued? They were all lifted by the
thieves in the cells and then pushed to the jailers. Why complain
about the thieves if the instructor of the Cultural and Educational
Department of the camp administration is a blatnoi, a thief, him—
self and writes reports on the politicals? (The Kem Transit
Prison.) And how are you ever going to get justice against the
thieves in the Rostov Transit Prison when this is their ancient
native tribal den?

They say that in 1942 at the Gorky Transit Prison some officer
prisoners (including Gavrilov, the military engineer Shchebetin,
and others) nonetheless rebelled, beat up the thieves, and forced
them to stay in line. But this is always regarded as a legend; did
the thieves capitulate in just one of the cells? For long? And
