450 1 THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

mouth and, instead, picked up his bow! and drank directly from
it. Klyugin visited him to jeer. (Soon after the Kady case,
he was transferred from Ivanovo to Moscow. That year saw
swift ascendancies and swift declines among those crimson stars
of the Gulag heaven. The time was approaching when they, too,
would be hurled into that same pit, but they didn‘t know it.)

Neither confirmation nor commutation of the sentence arrived,
so they had to take the four condemned men to Kineshma. They
took them in four one—and—a—half—ton trucks, with one condemned
man guarded by seven policemen in each truck.

In Kineshma they were put in the crypt of a monastery.
(Monastery architecture, liberated from monkish ideology, was
very useful for us.) At this point some other condemned
prisoners were added to their group, and they were all taken in
a prisoners‘ railroad car to Ivanovo.

In the freight yard in Ivanovo they separated three from the
rest—Saburov, Vlasov, and one of the men from the other group
—and immediately took the others away—to be shot—so as not
to crowd the prison any further. And thus it was that Vlasov
said farewell to Smirnov.

The three others were put in the courtyard of Prison No. 1 in
the dank and raw October air and held there for four hours
while they led out, led in, and searched other groups of prisoners
in transit. There still was no actual proof that they wouldn‘t be
shot that very day. During those four hours, they had to sit there
on the ground and think about it. At one point Saburov thought
they were being taken to be shot, but they were actually taken
to a cell instead. He did not cry out, but he gripped his neighbor‘s
arm so hard that the latter yelled with pain. The guards had to
‘drag Saburov and prod him with their bayonets.

There were four death cells in this prison—in the same cor—
ridor as the juvenile cells and the hospital cells! The death cells
had two doors: the customary wooden door with a peephole and
a door made of iron grating; each door had two locks, and the
jailer and the block supervisor each had a key to a different one,
so the doors could be opened only by the two together. Cell 43
was on the other side of a wall of the interrogator‘s office, and at
night, while the condemned men were waiting to be executed,
their ears were tormented by the screams of prisoners being
tortured.
