98 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

guilty of, but shouts: "Come on, talk! You know what about!"
That was what the interrogator Khaikin demanded of Skripnikova
in 1927. That was what they demanded of Vitkovsky in 1929.
And twenty—five years later nothing had changed. In 1952 Anna
Skripnikova was undergoing her fifth imprisonment, and Sivakov,
Chief of the Investigative Department of the Ordzhonikidze
State Security Administration, said to her:; "The prison doctor re—
ports you have a blood pressure of 240/120. That‘s too low, you
bitch! We‘re going to drive it up to 340 so you‘ll kick the bucket,
you viper, and with no black and blue marks; no beatings; no
broken bones. We‘ll just not let you sleep." She was in her fifties
at the time. And if, back in her cell, after a night spent in inter—
rogation, she closed her eyes during the day, the jailer broke in
and shouted: "Open your eyes or I‘ll haul you off that cot by the
legs and tie you to the wall standing up."

As early as 1921 interrogations usually took place at night.
At that time, too, they shone automobile lights in the prisoner‘s
face (the Ryazan Cheka—Stelmakh). And at the Lubyanka in
1926 (according to the testimony of Berta Gandal) they made
use of the hot—air heating system to fill the cell first with icy—cold
and then with stinking hot air. And there was an airtight cork—
lined cell in which there was no ventilation and they cooked the
prisoners. The poet Klyuyev was apparently confined in such a
cell and Berta Gandal also. A participant in the Yaroslavl up—
rising of 1918, Vasily Aleksandrovich Kasyanov, described how
the heat in such a cell was turned up until your blood began to
ooze through your pores. When they saw this happening through
the peephole, they would put the prisoner on a stretcher and take
him off to sign his confession. The "hot" and "salty" methods of
the "gold" period are well known. And in Georgia in 1926 they
used lighted cigarettes to burn the hands of prisoners under
interrogation. In Metekhi Prison they pushed prisoners into a
cesspool in the dark.

There is a very simple connection here. Once it was established
that charges had to be brought at any cost and despite everything,
threats, violence, tortures became inevitable. And the more fan—
tastic the charges were, the more ferocious the interrogation had
to be in order to force the required confession. Given the fact
that the cases were always fabricated, violence and torture had
