474 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

of spokesmen and free communication between cells, but it is
unlikely that even they had hopes of this any longer. By a fifteen—
day hunger strike, even though it ended with their being force—
fed through a tube, they had apparently succeeded in defending
some portions of their regimen: a one—hour period outdoors,
access to the provincial newspaper, notebooks for their writing.
These they kept. But the authorities promptly took away their
personal belongings and threw at them the common prison cloth—
ing of the special isolator. And a little while later, they cut half
an hour off their time outdoors. And then they reduced it by
another fifteen minutes.

These were the same people who were being dragged through
a sequence of prisons and exiles according to the rules of the
Big Solitaire. Some hadn‘t lived an ordinary, decent human life
for ten years; some for fifteen; all they had was this meager prison
life, with hunger strikes to boot. A few who had gotten used to
winning out over the prison administrations before the Revolu—
tion were still alive. However, before the Revolution they were
marching in step with Time against a weakening enemy. And
now Time was against them and allied with an enemy growing
steadily stronger. Among them were young people too (how
strange that seems to us nowadays)—those who considered them—
selves SR‘s, Social Democrats, or Anarchists even after the parties
themselves had been battered out of existence—and the only
future these new recruits had to look forward to was life in prison.

The loneliness surrounding the entire prison struggle of the
socialists, which became more hopeless with every year that
passed, grew more and more acute, approaching a vacuum in
the end. That was not how it had been under the Tsar: Throw
open the prison doors and the public greeted them with
flowers. Now they leafed through the newspapers and saw that
they were being drenched in vituperation, with slops even. (For
it was the socialists, after all, whom Stalin saw as the most dan—
gerous enemies of his socialism.) And the people were silent.
And what could give them any reason to dare suppose that the
people had any kindly feelings left toward those they had not
long before elected to the Constituent Assembly? And finally the
newspapers stopped showering profanity on them because Rus—
sian socialists had by that time come to seem so unimportant
and so impotent and even nonexistent. By this time these socialists
