The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 33

waves of habitual criminals (ugolovniki) and nonpolitical of—
fenders (bytoviki). Therefore we will merely recall that the
country—wide poverty and shortages during the period when the
government, all institutions, and the laws themselves were being
reorganized could serve only to increase greatly the number of
thefts, robberies, assaults, bribes, and the resale of merchandise
for excessive profit (speculation). Even though these crimes
presented less danger to the existence of the Republic, they, too,
had to be repressed, and their own waves of prisoners served to
swell the waves of counterrevolutionaries. And there was specu—
lation, too, of a purely political character, as was pointed out in
the decree of the Council of People‘s Commissars signed by
Lenin on July 22, 1918; "Those guilty of selling, or buying up,
or keeping for sale in the way of business food products which
have been placed under the monopoly of the Republic [A peasant
keeps grains for sale in the way of business. What else is his
business anyway?] . . . imprisonment for a term of not less than
ten years, combined with the most severe forced labor and con—
fiscation of all their property."

From that summer on, the countryside, which had already
been strained to the utmost limits, gave up its harvest year after
year without compensation. This led to peasant revolts and, in
the upshot, suppression of the revolts and new arrests."* It was
in 1920 that we knew (or failed to know) of the trial of the
"Siberian Peasants‘ Union." And at the end of 1920 the repres—
sion of the Tambov peasants‘ rebellion began. There was no
trial for them.

But the main drive to uproot people from the Tambov villages
took place mostly in June, 1921. Throughout the province con—
centration camps were set up for the families of peasants who
had taken part in the revolts. Tracts of open field were enclosed
with barbed wire strung on posts, and for three weeks every
family of a suspected rebel was confined there. If within that
time the man of the family did not turn up to buy his family‘s —
way out with his own head, they sent the family into exile.""

Even earlier, in March, 1921, the rebellious Kronstadt sailors,

14. "The hardest—working sector of the nation was positively uprooted."
Korolenko, letter to Gorky, August 10, 1921.

15. Tukhachevsky, "Borba s Kontrrevolyutsionnymi Vostaniyami" ("The

Struggle Against Counterrevolutionary Revolts"), in Voina i Revolyutsiya (War
and Revolution), 1926, No. 7/8.
