88 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

procedure for removing from the scene those collective farmers
who were dissatisfied with receiving for their labor mere "labor
day" points in the farm account books and wanted produce in—
stead. Whereas previously their cases had required a trial, based
on the article of the Code relating to "economic counterrevolu—
tion," now it was enough to produce a collective farm decree
confirmed by the District Executive Committee. And even then
these collective farmers, although they were sent into exile, must
have been relieved to know that they were not listed as enemies
of the people. The obligatory norm of "labor days" was different
in different areas, the easiest of all being among the peoples of
the Caucasus—seventy—five "labor days" a year; but despite that,
many of them were also sent off to Krasnoyarsk Province for
eight years.

As we have said, we are not going to go into a lengthy and
lavish examination of the waves of nonpolitical offenders and
common criminals. But, having reached 1947, we cannot remain
silent about one of the most grandiose of Stalin‘s decrees. We
have already mentioned the famous law of "Seven—Eight" or
"Seven—eighths," on the basis of which they arrested people right
and left—for taking a stalk of grain, a cucumber, two small
potatoes, a chip of wood, a spool of thread—all of whom got
ten years.""

But the requirements of the times, as Stalin understood them,
had changed, and the tenner, which had seemed adequate on the
eve of a terrible war, seemed now, in the wake of a world—wide
historical victory, inadequate. And so again, in complete dis—
regard of the Code, and totally overlooking the fact that many
different articles and decrees on the subject of thefts and rob—
beries already existed, on June 4, 1947, a decree was issued
which outdid them all. It was instantly christened "Four—sixths"
by the undismayed prisoners.

The advantages of the new decree lay first of all in its newness.
From the very moment it appeared, a torrent of the crimes it
specified would be bound to burst forth, thereby providing an
abundant wave of newly sentenced prisoners. But it offered an

46. In the actual documents of the "spool of thread" case, they wrote down
"200 meters of sewing material." The fact remains that they were ashamed to
write "a spool of thread."
