The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 57

the kulaks." In other words, I consider you an accomplice of the
enemy. And that finishes you! The most tattered landless laborer
in the countryside could quite easily be labeled a podkulachnik."*

And so it was that these two terms embraced everything that
constituted the essence of the village, its energy, its keenness of
wit, its love of hard work, its resistance, and its conscience. They
were torn up by the roots—and collectivization was accom—
plished.

But new waves rolled from the collectivized villages: one of
them was a wave of agricultural wreckers. Everywhere they
began to discover wrecker agronomists who up until that year
had worked honestly all their lives but who now purposely sowed
weeds in Russian fields (on the instructions, of course, of the
Moscow institute, which had now been totally exposed; indeed,
there were those same 200,000 unarrested members of the Work—
ing Peasants Party, the TKP!). Certain agronomists failed to put
into effect the profound instructions of Lysenko—and in one
such wave, in 1931, Lorkh, the so—called "king" of the potato,
was sent to Kazakhstan. Others carried out the Lysenko directives
too precisely and thus exposed their absurdity. (In 1934 Pskov
agronomists sowed flax on the snow—exactly as Lysenko had
ordered. The seeds swelled up, grew moldy, and died. The big
fields lay empty for a year. Lysenko could not say that the snow
was a kulak or that he himself was an ass. He accused the
agronomists of being kulaks and of distorting his technology.
And the agronomists went off to Siberia.) Beyond all this, in
almost every Machine and Tractor Station wrecking in the
repairing of tractors was discovered—and that is how the failures
of the first collective farm years were explained!

There was a wave "for harvest losses" (losses in comparison
with the arbitrary harvest figures announced the preceding spring
by the "Commission for Determination of the Harvest").

There was a wave "for failure to fulfill obligations undertaken
for delivery to the state of breadgrains"—the District Party Com—
mittee had undertaken the obligation, and the collective farm had
not fulfilled it: go to prison!

There was a wave for snipping ears, the nighttime snipping
of individual ears of grain in the field—a totally new type of

26. I remember very well that in our youth this term seemed quite logical;
there was nothing in the least unclear about it.
