The Ports of the Archipelago | 553

promised full and complete capitalist maintenance to the end of
his days here in our country. But to Gromyko‘s surprise, although
Erik would not have suffered any material loss, he became in—
dignant and uttered some very insulting words. Since they didn‘t
believe in his strength of mind, they locked him up in a dacha
outside Moscow, fed him like a prince in a fairy tale (sometimes
they used "awful methods of repression" on him: they refused to
accept his orders for the following day‘s menu and instead of the
spring chicken he ordered they simply brought him a steak, just
like that), surrounded him with the works of Marx—Engels—Lenin—
Stalin, and waited a year for him to be re—educated. To their sur—
prise it didn‘t happen. At that point they quartered with him a
former lieutenant general who had already served two years in
Norilsk. They probably calculated that by relating the horrors
of camp the lieutenant general would persuade Erik to surrender.
But either he carried out that assignment badly or else he didn‘t
want to carry it out. After ten months of their being imprisoned
together, the only thing he had taught Erik was broken Russian,
and he had bolstered Erik‘s growing repugnance for the bluecaps.
In the summer of 1950 they once more summoned Erik to Vyshin—
sky and he once more refused (in so doing, he made existence
contingent on consciousness, thereby violating all the Marxist—
Leninist rules!). And then Abakumov himself read Erik the
decree: twenty years in prison (what for???). They themselves
already regretted having gotten mixed up with this ignoramus,
but at the same time they couldn‘t release him and let him go back
to the West. And so they transported him in a separate compart—
ment, and it was there that he had heard the story of the Moscow
girl through the partition and seen through the train window in
the dawn light the rotting straw—thatched roofs of the age—old
Russia of Ryazan.

Those two years had very strongly confirmed him in his
loyalty to the West. He believed blindly in the West. He did not
want to recognize its weaknesses. He considered Western armies
unbeatable and Western political leaders faultless. He refused
to believe us when we told him that during the period of his im—
prisonment Stalin had begun a blockade of Berlin and had gotten
away with it perfectly well. Erik‘s milky neck and creamy cheeks
blushed with indignation whenever we ridiculed Churchill and
