The Interrogation | 127

had cleverly managed to last a month "without sleep" by sleeping
while he was standing up. ) "So now we will try the club. Prisoners
can‘t take more than two or three sessions of this. Let down your
trousers and lie down on the runner." The colonel sat down on
the prisoner‘s back. A.D. was going to count the blows. He didn‘t
yet know about a blow from a rubber truncheon on the sciatic
nerve when the buttocks have disappeared as a consequence of
prolonged starvation. The effect is not felt in the place where the
blow is delivered—it explodes inside the head. After the first blow
the victim was mad with pain and broke his nails on the carpet.
Ryumin beat away, trying to hit accurately. The colonel pressed
down on A.D.‘s torso—this was just the right sort of work for
three big shoulder—board stars, assisting the all—powerful Ryumin!
(After the beating the prisoner could not walk and, of course, was
not carried. They just dragged him along the floor. What was left
of his buttocks was soon so swollen that he could not button his
trousers, and yet there were practically no scars. He was hit by a
violent case of diarrhea, and, sitting there on the latrine bucket
in solitary, A.D. guffawed. He went through a second and a third
session, and his skin cracked, and Ryumin went wild, and started
to beat him on the stomach, breaking through the intestinal wall
and creating an enormous hernia through which A.D.‘s intestines
protruded. The prisoner was taken off to the Butyrki hospital
with a case of peritonitis, and for the time being their attempts to
compel him to commit a foul deed were suspended.)

That is how they can torture you too! After that it could seem a
simple fatherly caress when the Kishinev interrogator Danilov
beat Father Viktor Shipovalnikov across the back of the head
with a poker and pulled him by his long hair. (It is very conven—
ient to drag a priest around in that fashion; ordinary laymen can
be dragged by the beard from one corner of the office to the
other. And Richard Ohola—a Finnish Red Guard, and a partici—
pant in the capture of British agent Sidney Reilly, and com—
mander of a company during the suppression of the Kronstadt
revolt—was lifted up with pliers first by one end of his great
mustaches and then by the other, and held for ten minutes with
his feet off the floor.)

But the most awful thing they can do with you is this: undress
you from the waist down, place you on your back on the floor,
