570 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

"Sit down." "On your knees!" "Strip!" In these statutory orders
of the convoy lay the basic power one could not argue with. After
all, a naked person loses his self—assurance. He cannot straighten
up proudly and speak as an equal to people who are still clothed.
A search begins. (Kuibyshev, summer of 1949.) Naked prisoners
approach, carrying their possessions and the clothes they‘ve
taken off. A mass of armed soldiers surrounds them. It doesn‘t
look as though they are going to be led to a prisoner transport but
as though they are going to be shot immediately or put to death
in a gas chamber—and in that mood a human being ceases to
concern himself with his possessions. The convoy does every—
thing with intentional brusqueness, rudely, sharply, not speaking
one word in an ordinary human voice. After all, the purpose is to
terrify and dishearten. Suitcases are shaken apart, and things fall
all over the floor and are then stacked up in separate piles. Ciga—
rette cases, billfolds, and other pitiful "valuables" are all taken
away and thrown without any identifying marks into a barrel
that is standing nearby. (And, for some reason, the fact that this
particular receptacle isn‘t a safe, or a trunk, or a box, but a
barrel particularly depresses the naked prisoners there, and it
seems so terribly futile to protest.) The naked prisoner has all
he can do simply to snatch up his well—searched rags from the
floor and knot them together or tie them up in a blanket. Felt
boots? You can check them, throw them over there, sign for them
on the list! (You aren‘t the one who gets the receipt, but you are
the one who signs for having surrendered them, certifying that
you threw them onto the pile!) And when at dusk the last truck
leaves the prison yard with the prisoners, they see the convoy
guards rushing to grab the best leather suitcases from the pile
and select the best cigarette cases from the barrel. And after them,
the jailers scurry for their booty, too, and last of all the transit
prison trusties.

That is what it cost to spend one day to get to the cattle car.
And now the prisoners have clambered with relief up onto the
splintered planks of the bunks. But what kind of relief is this,
what kind of heated cattle car is this? Once again they are
squeezed in a nutcracker between cold and starvation, between
the thieves and the convoy.
