254 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

We soon discovered that there really were Russians fighting
against us and that they fought harder than any SS men. In July,
1943, for example, near Orel, a platoon of Russians in German
uniform defended Sobakinskiye Vyselki. They fought with the
desperation that might have been expected if they had built the
place themselves. One of them was driven into a root cellar.
They threw hand grenades in after him and he fell silent. But
they had no more than stuck their heads in than he let them
have another volley from his automatic pistol. Only when they
lobbed in an antitank grenade did they find out that, within the
root cellar, he had another foxhole in which he had taken shelter
from the infantry grenades. Just try to imagine the degree of
shock, deafness, and hopelessness in which he had kept on
fighting.

They defended, for example, the unshakable Dnieper bridge—
head south of Tursk. For two weeks we continued to fight there
for a mere few hundred yards. The battles were fierce in Decem—
ber, 1943, and so was the cold. Through many long days both
we and they went through the extreme trials of winter, fighting

 

for example, our stupid twenty—year policy of closing and destroying the
Moslem mosques in the Crimea. And compare that with the policy of the
farsighted conqueror Catherine the Great, who contributed state funds for
building and expanding the Crimean mosques. And the Hitlerites, when they
arrived, were smart enough to present themselves as their defenders. Later,
Caucasian detachments and Cossack armies—more than a cavalry corps—put
in an appearance on the German side. In the first winter of the war, platoons
and companies of Russian volunteers began to be formed. But the German
Command was very distrustful of these Russian units, and their master ser—
geants and lieutenants were Germans. Only their noncoms below master ser—
geant were Russian. They also used such German commands as "Achtung!,"
"Halt!" etc. More significant and entirely Russian were the following units: a
brigade in Lokot, in Bryansk Province, from November, 1941, when a local
teacher of engineering, K. P. Voskoboinikov, proclaimed the "National Labor
Party of Russia" and issued a manifesto to the citizens of the nation, hoisting
the flag of St. George; a unit in the Osintorf settlement near Orsha, formed
at the beginning of 1942 under the leadership of Russian émigrés (it must be
said that only a small group of Russian émigrés joined this movement, and
even they did not conceal their anti—German feelings and allowed many cross—
overs [including a whole battalion] to the Soviet side . . . after which they
were dropped by the Germans); and a unit formed by Gil, in the summer of
1942, near Lublin. (V. V. Gil, a Communist Party member and even, it seems,
a Jew, not only survived as a POW but, with the help of other POW‘s, became
the head of a camp near Suwalki and offered to create a "fighting alliance of
Russian nationalists" for the Germans.) However, there was as yet no Russian
Liberation Army in all of this and no Vlasov. The companies under German
command were put on the Russian front, as an experiment, and the Russian
units were sent against the Bryansk, Orsha, and Polish partisans.
