476 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

temptuously on Solovki, those KR‘s recall the politicals in their
own way! "The politicals? What a nasty crowd they were: they
looked down their noses at everyone else; they stuck to their own
group; they demanded their own special rations all the time and
their own special privileges. And they kept quarreling among
themselves incessantly." And how can one but feel that there
is truth here too? All those fruitless and endless arguments which
by now are merely comical. And those demands for additional
rations for themselves in comparison with the masses of the
hungry and impoverished? In the Soviet period, the honorable
appellation of politicals turned out to be a poisoned gift. And
then another reproach followed immediately: Why was it that
the socialists, who used to escape so easily under the Tsar, had
become so soft in Soviet prisons? Where are their escapes? In
general there were quite a few escapes, but who can remember
any socialists among them?

And, in turn, those prisoners "to the left" of the socialists—the
Trotskyites and the Communists—shunned the socialists, con—
sidering them exactly the same kind of KR‘s as the rest, and they
closed the moat of isolation around them with an encircling ring.

The Trotskyites and the Communists, each considering their
own direction more pure and lofty than all the rest, despised and
even hated the socialists (and each other) who were imprisoned
behind the bars of the same buildings and went outdoors to
walk in the same prison courtyards. Yekaterina Olitskaya recalls
that in 1937, at the transit prison on Vanino Bay, when the
socialists called to each other across the fence between the men‘s
and women‘s compounds, looking for fellow socialists and report—
ing news, the Communists Liza Kotik and Mariya Krutikova were
indignant because they might bring down punishment on them
all by such irresponsible behavior. They said: "All our mis—
fortunes are due to those socialist rats! [A profound explanation,
and so dialectical too!] They should be choked!" And those two
girls in the Lubyanka in 1925, whom I have already mentioned,
sang about spring and lilacs only because one of them was an
SR and the second a member of the Communist opposition, and
they had no political song in common, and in fact the Com—
munist—deviationist girl shouldn‘t really have joined the SR girl
in her protest at all.

And if in a Tsarist prison the different parties often joined
