72 | THE GULAG ARCHIPEL AGO

Of course, certain patterns could be discerned.

Among those arrested were:

Our own real spies abroad. (These were often the most dedi—
cated Comintern workers and Chekists, and among them were
many attractive women. They were called back to the Mother—
land and arrested at the border. They were then confronted with
their former Comintern chief, for example, Mirov—Korona, who
confirmed that he himself had been working for one of the
foreign intelligence services—which meant that his subordinates
were automatically guilty too. And the more dedicated they
were, the worse it was for them.)

Soviet employees of the Chinese Eastern Railroad, the
KVZhD, were one and all arrested as Japanese spies, including
their wives, children, and grandmothers. But we have to admit
these arrests had already begun several years earlier.

Koreans from the Far East were sent into exile in Kazakhstan
—the first experiment in mass arrests on the basis of race.

Leningrad Estonians were all arrested on the strength of
having Estonian family names and charged with being anti—
Communist Estonian spies.

All Latvian Riflemen and all Latvian Chekists were arrested.
Yes, indeed, those very Latvians who had been the midwives of
the Revolution, who just a short while before had constituted
the nucleus and the pride of the Cheka! And with them were
taken even those Communists of bourgeois Latvia who had been
exchanged in 1921—and been freed thereby from their dreadful
Latvian prison terms of two and three years. (In Leningrad, the
Latvian Department of the Herzen Institute, the House of Latvian
Culture, the Estonian Club, the Latvian Technicum, and the
Latvian and Estonian newspapers were all closed down.)

In the midst of the general to—do, the Big Solitaire game was
finally wound up. All those not yet taken were raked in. There
was no longer any reason to keep it secret. The time had come
to write "finis" to the whole game. So now the socialists were
taken off to prison in whole "exiles" (for example, the Ufa "exile"
and the Saratov "exile"), and they were all sentenced together
and driven off in herds to the slaughterhouses of the Archipelago.

Nowhere was it specifically prescribed that more members
of the intelligentsia should be arrested than of other groups. But
