First Cell, First Love | 201

Sasha, and I was convinced the Germans would win! That‘s what
did me in!" There you are! He was one of the "organizers of
victory," but each day he believed in the Germans‘ success and
awaited their inevitable arrival. Not because he loved them, but
simply because he had so sober an insight into our economy
(which I, of course, knew nothing about and therefore believed
in).

All of us in the cell were deeply depressed, but none of us
was so crushed as Z———v, none took his arrest as so profound
a tragedy. He learned from us that he would get no more than a
tenner, that during his years in camp he would, of course, be a
work superintendent, and that he would not have to experience
real suffering, as indeed he never did. But this did not comfort
him in the least. He was too stricken by the collapse of such a
glorious life. After all, it was his one and only life on earth, and
no one else‘s, which had interested him all his thirty—six years.
And more than once, sitting on his cot in front of the table,
propping his pudgy head on his short, pudgy arm, he would start
to sing quietly, in a singsong voice and with lost, befogged eyes:

Forgotten and abandoned
Since my young, early years,
I was left a tiny orphan. . . .

He could never get any further than that. At that point, he would
break into explosive sobs. All that bursting strength which could
not break through the walls that enclosed him he turned inward,
toward self—pity.

And toward pity for his wife. Every tenth day (since oftener
was not allowed) his wife, long since unloved, brought him rich
and bountiful food parcels—the whitest of white bread, butter,
red caviar, veal, sturgeon. He would give each of us a sandwich
and a twist of tobacco and then bend down to the provisions he
had set before himself, delighting in odors and colors that con—
trasted vividly with the bluish potatoes of the old underground
revolutionary Fastenko. Then his tears would start to pour again,
redoubled. He recalled out loud his wife‘s tears, whole years of
tears: some due to love notes she had found in his trousers, some
to some woman‘s underpants in his overcoat pocket, stuffed
there hurriedly in his automobile and forgotten. And when he
was thus torn by burning self—pity, his armor of evil energy fell
