The Supreme Measure | 445

2. They suffered from being in stuffy, overcrowded cells.
Into a cell intended for solitary confinement they would shove
seven (never fewer), sometimes ten, fifteen, even fwenty—ecight
prisoners awaiting execution. (Strakhovich in Leningrad, 1942.)
And they remained packed in this way for weeks or even months!
What kind of nightmare was your seven to be hanged? People
in these circumstances don‘t think about execution, and it‘s not
being shot they worry about, but how to move their legs, how to
turn over, how to get a gulp of air.

In 1937, when up to forty thousand prisoners were being
held at one time in the prisons of Ivanovo—the internal prison of
the NKVD, No. 1, No. 2, and the cells for preliminary detention
—although they were just barely designed to hold three to four
thousand, Prison No. 2 held a mixture of prisoners under inter—
rogation, prisoners condemned to camp, prisoners sentenced to
be executed, prisoners whose death sentences had been com—
muted, and ordinary thieves—and all of them stood for several
days so jammed in against each other in one big cell that it was
impossible either to raise or lower an arm and those who were
shoved up against the bunks could easily break their legs on the
edges. It was winter, but in order not to be suffocated the
prisoners broke the glass in the windows. (It was in this cell that
the old Bolshevik Alalykin, with his snow—white head of hair—he
had joined the Party in 1898 and had quit the Party in 1917
after the April Theses—waited for his death sentence to be
carried out.)

3. Prisoners sentenced to death also suffered from hunger.
They waited such a long time after the death sentence had been
imposed that their principal sensation was no longer the fear
of being shot but the pangs of hunger: where could they get
something to eat? In 1941 Aleksandr Babich spent seventy—five
days in a death cell in the Krasnoyarsk Prison. He had already
reconciled himself to death and awaited execution as the only
possible end to his unsuccessful life. But he began to swell up
from starvation. At that point, they commuted his death sentence
to ten years, and that was when he began his camp career. And
what was the record stay in a death cell? Who knows? Vsevolod
Petrovich Golitsyn, the elder of a death cell, so to speak, spent
140. days in it in 1938. But was that a record? The glory of
Russian science, famed geneticist N. I. Vavilov, waited several
