292 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

rogators, the prosecutor‘s staff, the internal guard in the prison,
and the convoy had all worked to no purpose.

Here is one straightforward and typical case that was brought
before a military tribunal. In 1941, the Security operations branch
of our inactive army stationed in Mongolia was called on to show
its activity and vigilance. The military medical assistant Lozovsky,
who was jealous of Lieutenant Pavel Chulpenyev because of some
woman, realized this. He addressed three questions to Chulpenyev
when they were alone: 1. "Why, in your opinion, are we retreating
from the Germans?" (Chulpenyev‘s reply: "They have more
equipment and they were mobilized earlier." Lozovsky‘s counter:
"No, it‘s a maneuver. We‘re decoying them." ) 2. "Do you believe
the Allies will help?" (Chulpenyev: "I believe they‘ll help, but
not from unselfish motives." Lozovsky‘s counter: "They are
deceiving us. They won‘t help us at all.") 3. "Why was Voroshilov
sent to command the Northwest Front?"

Chulpenyev answered and forgot about them. And Lozovsky
wrote a denunciation. Chulpenyev was summoned before the
Political Branch of the division and expelled from the Komsomol:
for a defeatist attitude, for praising German equipment, for be—
littling the strategy of our High Command. The loudest voice
raised against him belonged to the Komsomol organizer Kalyagin,
who had behaved like a coward at the battle of Khalkhin—Gol, in
Chulpenyev‘s presence, and therefore found it convenient to get
rid of the witness once and for all.

Chulpenyev‘s arrest followed. He had one confrontation with
Lozovsky. Their previous conversation was not even brought up
by the interrogator. One question was asked: "Do you know this
man?" "Yes."—"Witness, you may leave." (The interrogator was
afraid the charge might fall through.)""

Depressed by his month‘s incarceration in the sort of hole in the
ground we have already described, Chulpenyev appeared before
a military tribunal of the 36th Motorized Division. Present were
Lebedev, the Divisional Political Commissar, and Slesarev, the
Chief of the Political Branch. The witness Lozovsky was not even

10. Today Lozovsky holds the degree of candidate in medical sciences and
lives in Moscow. Everything is going well with him. Chulpenyev drives a trolley
bus.
