The Law Becomes a Man | 345

clung to those treasures, since the possibility of a new fortress of
faith arising—if it existed at all—did not depend on them. But
one has also to picture the situation of that unfortunate Patriarch,
not elected to his post until after the October Revolution, who had
for a few short years led a church that was always persecuted,
restricted, under fire, and whose preservation had been entrusted
to him.

But right then and there a sure—fire campaign of persecution
began in the papers, directed against the Patriarch and high
church authorities who were strangling the Volga region with the
bony hand of famine. And the more firmly the Patriarch clung to
his position, the weaker it became. In March a movement to re—
linquish the valuables, to come to an agreement with the govern—
ment, began even among the clergy. Their still undispelled qualms
were expressed to Kalinin by Bishop Antonin Granovsky, a mem—
ber of the Central Committee of Pomgol: "The believers fear that
the church valuables may be used for other purposes, more
limited and alien to their hearts." (Knowing the general principles
of our Progressive Doctrine, the experienced reader will agree that
this was indeed very probable. After all, the Comintern‘s needs
and those of the East in the course of being liberated were no less
acute than those of the Volga.)

The Petrograd Metropolitan, Veniamin, was similarly impelled
by a mood of trust: "This belongs to God and we will give all of
it by ourselves." But forced requisitions were wrong. Let the
sacrifice be of our own free will. He, too, wanted verification by
the clergy and the believers: to watch over the church valuables
up to the very moment when they were transformed into bread for
the starving. And in all this he was tormented lest he violate the
censuring will of the Patriarch.

In Petrograd things seemed to be working out peacefully. The
atmosphere at the session of the Petrograd Pomgol on March 5,
1922, was even joyful, according to the testimony of an eye—
witness. Veniamin announced: "The Orthodox Church is pre—
pared to give everything to help the starving." It saw sacrilege
only in forced requisition. But in that case requisition was un—
necessary! Kanatchikov, Chairman of the Petrograd Pomgol,
gave his assurances that this would produce a favorable attitude
toward the church on the part of the Soviet government. (Not
