The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 29

In 1918, in order to speed up the cultural victory of the Revo—
lution as well, they began to ransack the churches and throw out
the relics of saints, and to carry off church plate. Popular dis—
orders broke out in defense of the plundered churches and mon—
asteries. Here and there the alarm bells rang out, and the true
Orthodox believers rushed forth, some of them with clubs.
Naturally, some had to be expended right on the spot and others
arrested.

In considering now the period from 1918 to 1920, we are in
difficulties: Should we classify among the prison waves all those
who were done in before they even got to prison cells? And in
what classification should we put those whom the Committees of
the Poor took behind the wing of the village soviet or to the
rear of the courtyard, and finished off right there? Did the parti—
cipants in the clusters of plots uncovered in every province (two
in Ryazan; one in Kostroma, Vyshni Volochek, and Velizh;
several in Kiev; several in Moscow; one in Saratov, Chernigov,
Astrakhan, Seliger, Smolensk, Bobruisk, the Tambov Cavalry,
Chembar, Velikiye Luki, Mstislavl, etc.) at least succeed in
setting foot on the land of the Archipelago, or did they not—
and are they therefore not related to the subject of our investiga—
tions? Bypassing the repression of the now famous rebellions
(Yaroslavl, Murom, Rybinsk, Arzamas), we know of certain
events only by their names—for instance, the Kolpino executions
of June, 1918. What were they? Who were they? And where
should they be classified?

There is also no little difficulty in deciding whether we should
classify among the prison waves or on the balance sheets of the
Civil War those tens of thousands of hostages, i.e., people not
personally accused of anything, those peaceful citizens not even
listed by name, who were taken off and destroyed simply to
terrorize or wreak vengeance on a military enemy or a re—
bellious population. After August 30, 1918, the NKVD ordered
the localities "to arrest immediately all Right Socialist Revolution—
aries and to take a significant number of hostages from the bour—
geoisie and military officers."" (This was just as if, for example,
after the attempt of Aleksandr Ulyanov‘s group to assassinate the
Tsar, not only its members but all the students in Russia and a
significant number of zemstvo officials had been arrested.) By

6. Vestnik NKVD, 1918, No. 21—22, p. 1. —
