38 | THE GULAG ARCHIPEL AGO

children was classified as a political crime under Article 58—10 of
the Code—in other words, counterrevolutionary propaganda!
True, one was still permitted to renounce one‘s religion at one‘s
trial: it didn‘t often happen but it nonetheless did happen that
the father would renounce his religion and remain at home to raise
the children while the mother went to the Solovetsky Islands.
(Throughout all those years women manifested great firmness in
their faith.) All persons convicted of religious activity received
tenners, the longest term then given.

(In those years, particularly in 1927, in purging the big cities
for the pure society that was coming into being, they sent pros—
titutes to the Solovetsky Islands along with the "nuns." Those
lovers of a sinful earthly life were given three—year sentences under
a more lenient article of the Code. The conditions in prisoner
transports, in transit prisons, and on the Solovetsky Islands were
not of a sort to hinder them from plying their merry trade among
the administrators and the convoy guards. And three years later
they would return with laden suitcases to the places they had come
from. Religious prisoners, however, were prohibited from ever
returning to their children and their home areas.)

As early as the early twenties, waves appeared that were purely
national in character—at first not very large in proportion to the
populations of their homelands, especially by Russian yardsticks:
Mussavatists from Azerbaijan; Dashnaks from Armenia; Georg—
ian Mensheviks; and Turkmenian Basmachi, who were resisting
the establishment of Soviet power in Central Asia. (The first
Central Asian soviets were Russian in makeup by an overwhelm—
ing majority, and were therefore seen as outposts of Russian
power.) In 1926 the Zionist society of "Hehalutz" was exiled in
toto—since it had failed to respond to the all—powerful upsurge of
internationalism.

Among subsequent generations, a picture has evolved of the
twenties as some kind of holiday of totally unlimited freedom. In
this book we shall encounter people who viewed the twenties quite
differently. The non—Party students at this time sought "autonomy
for higher educational institutions," the right of assembly, and the
removal from the curriculum of excessive political indoctrination.
Arrests were the answer. These were intensified during holidays—
for example, on May 1, 1924. In 1925, about one hundred Lenin—
