Arrest | 5

ber, but that‘s what the regulations call for, and so he has to sit
there all night long and sign in the morning.‘ For the witness,
jerked from his bed, it is torture too—to go out night after night
to help arrest his own neighbors and acquaintances.)

The traditional image of arrest is also trembling hands packing
for the victim—a change of underwear, a piece of soap, some—
thing to eat; and no one knows what is needed, what is permitted,
what clothes are best to wear; and the Security agents keep in—
terrupting and hurrying you:

"You don‘t need anything. They‘ll feed you there. It‘s warm
there." (It‘s all lies. They keep hurrying you to frighten you.)

The traditional image of arrest is also what happens afterward,
when the poor victim has been taken away. It is an alien, brutal,
and crushing force totally dominating the apartment for hours on
end, a breaking, ripping open, pulling from the walls, emptying
things from wardrobes and desks onto the floor, shaking, dumping
out, and ripping apart—piling up mountains of litter on the floor
—and the crunch of things being trampled beneath jackboots.
And nothing is sacred in a search! During the arrest of the loco—
motive engineer Inoshin, a tiny coffin stood in his room containing
the body of his newly dead child. The "jurists" dumped the child‘s
body out of the coffin and searched it. They shake sick people out
of their sickbeds, and they unwind bandages to search beneath
them.* '

Nothing is so stupid as to be inadmissible during a search!
For example, they seized from the antiquarian Chetverukhin "a
certain number of pages of Tsarist decrees"—to wit, the decree
on ending the war with Napoleon, on the formation of the Holy
Alliance, and a proclamation of public prayers against cholera
during the epidemic of 1830. From our greatest expert on Tibet,
Vostrikov, they confiscated ancient Tibetan manuscripts of great
value; and it took the pupils of the deceased scholar thirty years
to wrest them from the KGB! When the Orientalist Nevsky was

1. The regulation, purposeless in itself, derives, N.M. recalls, from that
strange time when the citizenry not only was supposed to but actually dared to
verify the actions of the police.

2. When in 1937 they wiped out Dr. Kazakov‘s institute, the "commission"
broke up the jars containing the lysates developed by him, even though patients
who had been cured and others still being treated rushed around them, begging
them to preserve the miraculous medicines. (According to the official version,
the lysates were supposed to be poisons; in that case, why should they not have
been kept as material evidence?)
