The Law Becomes a Man | 357

was supporting Germany in its difficult struggle with trainloads of
foodstuffs and a monthly tribute in gold, the SR‘s traitorously
prepared (well, they didn‘t actually prepare anything but, as was
their custom, did more talking about it than anything—but what
if they really had!) to blow up the railroad tracks in front of one
such train, thus keeping the gold in the Motherland. In other
words, they "prepared criminal destruction of our public wealth,
the railroads."

(At that time the Communists were not yet ashamed of and
did not conceal the fact that, yes, indeed, Russian gold had been
shipped off to Hitler‘s future empire, and it didn‘t seem to dawn
on Krylenko despite his study in two academic departments—
history and law—nor did any of his assistants whisper the notion
to him, that if steel rails are public wealth, then maybe gold
ingots are too?)

From this fourth charge a fifth followed inexorably: the SR‘s
had intended to procure the technical equipment for such an
explosion with money received from Allied representatives. (They
had wanted to take money from the Entente in order not to give
gold away to Kaiser Wilhelm.) And this was the extreme of
treason! (Just in case, Krylenko did mutter something about the
SR‘s also having connections with Ludendorff‘s General Staff,
but this stone had indeed landed in the wrong vegetable garden
and he quickly dropped the whole thing.)

From this it was only a very short step to the sixth charge: that
the SR‘s had been Entente spies in 1918. Yesterday they had
been revolutionaries, and today they were spies. At the time, this
accusation probably sounded explosive. But since then, and after
many, many trials, the whole thing makes one want to vomit.

Well, then, the seventh and tenth points concerned collabora—
tion with Savinkov, or Filonenko, or the Cadets, or the "Union
of Rebirth" (had it really ever existed?), and even with aristocratic,
reactionary, dilettante—so—called "white—lining"—students, or
even the White Guards.

This series of linked charges was well expounded by the prose—
cutor."* As a result of either hard thinking in his office, or a
sudden stroke of genius on the rostrum, he managed in this trial
to come up with that tone of heartfelt sympathy and friendly
criticism which he would make use of in subsequent trials with

21. The title of "prosecutor" had by now been restored to him.
