20 | THE GULAG ARCHIPEL AGO

as an enemy of the people (for among us every person is totally
exposed from the moment of arrest). And he had wished happi—
ness—to an enemy?®

The panes rattled. The German shells tore up the earth two
hundred yards away, reminding one that this could not have
happened back in the rear, under the ordinary circumstances of
established existence, but only out here, under the breath of
death, which was not only close by but in the face of which all
were equal.

This is not going to be a volume of memoirs about my own
life. Therefore I am not going to recount the truly amusing de—
tails of my arrest, which was like no other. That night the
SMERSH officers gave up their last hope of being able to make
out where we were on the map—they never had been able to
read maps anyway. So they politely handed the map to me and
asked me to tell the driver how to proceed to counterintelligence
at army headquarters. I, therefore, led them and myself to that
prison, and in gratitude they immediately put me not in an
ordinary cell but in a punishment cell. And I really must describe
that closet in a German peasant house which served as a tem—
porary punishment cell.

It was the length of one human body and wide enough for
three to lie packed tightly, four at a pinch. As it happened, I was
the fourth, shoved in after midnight. The three lying there
blinked sleepily at me in the light of the smoky kerosene lantern
and moved over, giving me enough space to lie on my side, half
between them, half on top of them, until gradually, by sheer
weight, I could wedge my way in. And so four overcoats lay on
the crushed—straw—covered floor, with eight boots pointing at the
door. They slept and I burned. The more self—assured I had been
as a captain half a day before, the more painful it was to crowd
onto the floor of that closet. Once or twice the other fellows
woke up numb on one side, and we all turned over at the same
time.

6. Here is what is most surprising of all:; one can be a human being despite
everything! Nothing happened to Travkin. Not long ago, we met again cordially,
and I really got to know him for the first time. He is a retired general and an
inspector of the Hunters‘ Alliance.
