The Bluecaps | 159

called him in and handed him the newspaper which carried the
announcement of Beria‘s exposure. At the time this was virtually
a cosmic upheaval. Abakumov read it and, with not so much as
the twitch of an eyebrow, he turned the page and started to read
the sports news! On another occasion, during an interrogation in
the presence of a high—ranking gaybist who had, in the recent past,
been his subordinate, Abakumov asked him: "How could you
have permitted the investigation of the Beria case to be con—
ducted by the prosecutor‘s office instead of by the MGB?" (Every—
thing in his own domain kept nagging him.) He went on: "Do
you really believe they are going to put me, the Minister of State
Security, on trial?" The answer was "Yes." And he replied: "Then
put on your top hat! The Organs are finished!" (He was, of course,
too pessimistic, uneducated courier that he was.) But when he
was in the Lubyanka, Abakumov was not afraid of being tried;
he was afraid of being poisoned. (This, too, showed what a worthy
son of the Organs he was!) He started to reject the prison food
altogether and would eat only eggs that he bought from the prison
store. (In this case, he simply lacked technical imagination. He
thought one couldn‘t poison eggs.) The only books he borrowed
from the well—stocked Lubyanka library were the works of, believe
it or not, Stalin! (Who had imprisoned him.) But in all likelihood
this was for show rather than the result of any calculation that
Stalin‘s adherents would gain power. He spent two years in prison.
Why didn‘t they release him? The question is not a naive one. In
terms of his crimes against humanity, he was over his head in
blood. But he was not the only one! And all the others came out
of it safe and sound. There is some hidden secret here too: there
is a vague rumor that in his time he had personally beaten
Khrushchev‘s daughter—in—law Lyuba Sedykh, the wife of Khru—
shchev‘s older son, who had been condemned to a punishment bat—
talion in Stalin‘s time and who died as a result. And, so goes the
rumor, this was why, having been imprisoned by Stalin, he was
tried—in Leningrad—under Khrushchev and shot on December
18, 1954." But Abakumov had no real reason to be depressed:
the Organs still didn‘t perish because of that.

18. Here is one more of his eccentricities as a VIP: he used to change into
civilian clothes and walk around Moscow with Kuznetsov, the head of his
bodyguard, and whenever he felt like it, he would hand out money from the

Cheka operations funds. Does not this smell of Old Russia—charity for the sake
of one‘s soul?
