34 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

minus those who had been shot, were sent to the islands of the
Archipelago via the Trubetskoi bastion of the Peter and Paul
Fortress.

That same year, 1921, began with Cheka Order No. 10, dated
January 8: "To intensify the repression of the bourgeoisie." Now,
when the Civil War had ended, repression was not to be reduced but
intensified! Voloshin has pictured for us in several of his poems how
this worked out in the Crimea.

In the summer of 1921, the State Commission for Famine Relief,
including Kuskova, Prokopovich, Kishkin, and others, was arrested.
They had tried to combat the unprecedented famine in Russia. The
heart of the matter, however, was that theirs were the wrong hands to
be offering food and could not be allowed to feed the starving. The
chairman of this commission, the dying Korolenko, who was pardoned,
called the destruction of the commission "the worst of dirty political
tricks, a dirty political trick by the government.""*

In that same year the practice of arresting students began (for
example, the group of Yevgeniya Doyarenko in the Timiryazev
Academy) for "criticism of the system" (not in public, merely
in conversation among themselves). Such cases, however, were
evidently few, because the group in question was interrogated
by Menzhinsky and Yagoda personally.

Also in 1921 the arrests of members of all non—Bolshevik
parties were expanded and systematized. In fact, all Russia‘s
political parties had been buried, except the victorious one. (Oh,
do not dig a grave for someone else!) And so that the dissolution
of these parties would be irreversible, it was necessary that their
members should disintegrate and their physical bodies too.

Not one citizen of the former Russian state who had ever
joined a party other than the Bolshevik Party could avoid his
fate. He was condemned unless, like Maisky or Vyshinsky, he
succeeded in making his way across the planks of the wreck to
the Bolsheviks. He might not be arrested in the first group. He
might live on, depending on how dangerous he was believed to
be, until 1922, 1932, or even 1937, but the lists were kept; his

16. Korolenko‘s letter to Gorky, September 14, 1921. Korolenko also reminds
us of a particularly important situation in the prisons of 1921: "Everywhere
they are saturated with typhus." This has been confirmed by Skripnikova and
others imprisoned at the time.
