The Interrogation | 137

smash onto the sidewalk five floors below, just as, in my child—
hood, my unknown predecessor had jumped from House 33 in
Rostov—on—the—Don. In the gaps where the frost had melted, the
rooftops of Moscow could be seen, rooftop after rooftop, and
above them merry little puffs of smoke. But I was staring not in
that direction but at a mound of piled—up manuscripts—someone
else‘s—covering the entire center of the floor in this half—empty
room, thirty—six square yards in area, manuscripts which had
been dumped there a little while before and had not yet been
examined. In notebooks, in file folders, in homemade binders, in
tied and untied bundles, and simply in loose pages. The manu—
scripts lay there like the burial mound of some interred human
spirit, its conical top rearing higher than the interrogator‘s desk, al—
most blocking me from his view. And brotherly pity ached in me
for the labor of that unknown person who had been arrested the
previous night, these spoils from the search of his premises hav—
ing been dumped that very morning on the parquet floor of the
torture chamber, at the feet of that thirteen—foot Stalin. I sat
there and I wondered: Whose extraordinary life had they brought
in for torment, for dismemberment, and then for burning?

Oh, how many ideas and works had perished in that building
—a whole lost culture? Oh, soot, soot, from the Lubyanka
chimneys! And the most hurtful thing of all was that our descend—
ants would consider our generation more stupid, less gifted, less
vocal than in actual fact it was.

One needs to have only two points in order to draw a straight
line between them.

In 1920, as Ehrenburg recalls, the Cheka addressed him as
follows:

"You prove to us that you are not Wrangel‘s agent."

And in 1950, one of the leading colonels of the MGB, Foma
Fomich Zheleznov, said to his prisoners: "We are not going
to sweat to prove the prisoner‘s guilt to him. Let him prove to
us that he did not have hostile intent."

And along this cannibalistically artless straight line lie the
recollections of countless millions.

What a speed—up and simplification of criminal investigation
