Tyurzak | 483

Vladimir Borisovich Zeldovich, sent there from Abez Station,
regarded it, and Anna Petrovna Skripnikova, who was sent there
in 1956 from the Kemerovo camps. Skripnikova was particularly
astonished at the regular dispatch, every ten days, of petitions
and declarations (she even began to write, believe it or not, to
the United Nations) and by the excellent library, including books
in foreign languages: they used to bring the complete catalogue
to the cell and you made out a list for a whole year ahead.

It is also necessary to keep in mind how elastic our law is:
thousands of women ("wives") were sentenced to prison, to
tyurzak. And then one fine day someone whistled—and they were
transferred to camps. (The Kolyma hadn‘t fulfilled the gold
plan.) And so they switched them, without any trial or any
court.

In fact, does tyurzak actually exist at all, or is it only the
vestibule for the camps?

And only here, right here, is where our chapter ought to have
begun. It ought to have examined that glimmering light which, in
time, the soul of the lonely prisoner begins to emit, like the halo
of a saint. Torn from the hustle—bustle of everyday life in so
absolute a degree that even counting the passing minutes puts
him intimately in touch with the Universe, the lonely prisoner has
to have been purged of every imperfection, of everything that has
stirred and troubled him in his former life, that has prevented
his muddied waters from settling into transparency. How grate—
fully his fingers reach out to feel and crumble the lumps of earth
in the vegetable garden (but, alas, it is all asphalt). How his
head rises of itself toward the Eternal Heavens (but, alas, this
is forbidden). And how much touching attention the little bird
on the window sill arouses in him (but, alas, there is that "muzzle"
there, and the netting as well, and the hinged ventilation pane is
locked). And what clear thoughts, what sometimes surprising
conclusions, he writes down on the paper issued him (but, alas,
only if you buy it in the commissary, and only if you turn it in to
the prison office when you have used it up—for eternal safe—
keeping . . .).
