That Spring | 267

of any consequence. But if, from that time on, they had lived
for a quarter of a century, not as retired officers, on pensions and
with honor, but as homeless exiles, then how could anyone point
to any moral basis for trying them? That is the kind of dialectic
Anatole France mastered, but which we cannot seem to grasp.
According to Anatole France, by the time it‘s today, yesterday‘s
martyr is already in the wrong—in fact, from the first minute the
red shirt covered his body. And vice versa. But our version is:
If they rode me for one short year, when I had just outgrown
being a foal, then I am called a riding horse all my life, even
though I have long since been used only as a cab horse.

Colonel Konstantin Konstantinovich Yasevich was very dif—
ferent from these helpless émigré mummies. For him, clearly,
the end of the Civil War had not ended the struggle against
Bolshevism. As to how he continued to struggle—where and
with what—he did not enlighten me. But the sense that he was
still in the service remained with him in the cell itself. In the
midst of all the chaotic concepts, the blurred and broken lines of
vision, in most of our heads, he had, evidently, a clear and exact
view of everything around him; as a result of this reasoned point
of view on life, his body, too, exhibited a steady strength, re—
siliency, and activity. He was certainly not less than sixty. His
head was totally bald, without a single hair. He had already
survived his interrogation and was awaiting his sentence, like
the rest of us. He could expect no help from anywhere, of course.
But he kept his young, even rosy skin. Among all of us in the
cell, he alone did exercises every morning and washed himself at
the faucet. The rest of us were trying not to squander the calories
in our prison ration. He put his time to use, and whenever an
aisle opened up between the rows of board bunks, he paced
those fifteen to twenty feet with a precise stride and a precise
profile, crossing his arms over his chest and staring through the
walls with clear young eyes.

And the difference between us and him was that we were all
astonished at what was happening to us, while nothing around
him contradicted his expectations, and precisely for that reason
he was absolutely alone in the cell.

A year later, I was able to appraise his conduct in prison.
Once again I was in the Butyrki, and in one of those seventy
