54 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

you would always be ridden by a guilty conscience. Of course,
anyone who had already mastered the rules of the institution
would yield and give up his gold—that was easier. But it was a
mistake to give it up too readily. They would refuse to believe
you had coughed it all up, and they would continue to hold you.
But you‘d be wrong, too, to wait too long before yielding: you‘d
end up kicking the bucket or they‘d paste a term on you out of
meanness. One of the Tatar draymen endured all the tortures: he
had no gold! They imprisoned his wife, too, and tortured her, but
the Tatar stuck to his story: no gold! Then they arrested his
daughter: the Tatar couldn‘t take it any more. He coughed up
100,000 rubles. At this point they let his family go, but slapped
a prison term on him. The crudest detective stories and operas
about brigands were played out in real life on a vast national scale.

The introduction of the passport system on the threshold of
the thirties also provided the camps with a good—sized draft of
reinforcements. Just as Peter I simplified the social structure,
sweeping clean all the nooks and crannies of the old Russian
class system, so our socialist passport system swept out, in
particular, the betwixt—and—between insects. It hit at the clever,
homeless portion of the population which wasn‘t tied down to
anything. In the early stages, people made many mistakes with
those passports—and those not registered at their places of resi—
dence, and those not registered as having left their former places of
residence, were raked into the Archipelago, if only for a single
year.

And so the waves foamed and rolled. But over them all, in
1929—1930, billowed and gushed the multimillion wave of dis—
possessed kulaks. It was immeasurably large and it could cer—
tainly not have been housed in even the highly developed net—
work of Soviet interrogation prisons (which in any case were
packed full by the "gold" wave). Instead, it bypassed the prisons,
going directly to the transit prisons and camps, onto prisoner
transports, into the Gulag country. In sheer size this nonrecurring
tidal wave (it was an ocean) swelled beyond the bounds of any—
thing the penal system of even an immense state can permit itself.
There was nothing to be compared with it in all Russian history.
It was the forced resettlement of a whole people, an ethnic
catastrophe. But yet so cleverly were the channels of the GPU—
