566 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

the rest of the exiled nations were sent off in the same way. In
1945 Russia‘s prodigal sons and daughters were sent from Ger—
many, from Czechoslovakia, from Austria, and simply from west—
ern border areas—whoever had gotten there on his own—in such
trains as these. In 1949 that is how they collected the 58‘s in
Special Camps.

The Stolypins follow routine railroad schedules. And the red
trains travel on imposing waybills, signed by important Gulag
generals. The Stolypins cannot go to an empty site, to "nowhere";
their destination must always be a station, even if it‘s in some
nasty little two—bit town with some preliminary detention cells
in an attic. But the red trains can go into emptiness: and wherever
one does go, there immediately rises right next to it, out of the sea
of the steppe or the sea of the taiga, a new island of the Archi—
pelago.

Not every red cattle car is ready as is to transport prisoners.
First it has to be prepared. But not in the sense some of our
readers might expect: that the coal or lime it carried before it
was assigned to carry people has to be swept out and the car
cleaned—that isn‘t always done. Nor in the sense that it needs
to be calked and have a stove installed if it is winter. (When the
section of the railroad from Knyazh—Pogost to Ropcha was being
built and wasn‘t yet part of the general railroad network, they
immediately began to transport prisoners on it—in freight cars
without either stoves or bunks. In winter the zeks lay on the icy,
snowy fioor and weren‘t even given any hot food, because the
train could make it all the way through this section in less than
a day. Whoever can in imagination lie there like them and survive
those eighteen to twenty hours shall indeed survive! Here is what
was involved in preparing a red cattle car for prisoners: The
floors, walls, and ceilings had to be tested for strength and
checked for holes or faults. Their small windows had to be barred.
A hole had to be cut in the floor to serve as a drain, and specially
protected by sheet iron firmly nailed down all around it. The
necessary number of platforms on which convoy guards would
stand with machine guns had to be evenly distributed throughout
the train, and if there were too few, more had to be built. Access
to the roofs of the cars had to be provided. Sites for searchlights
had to be selected and supplied with uninterrupted electric power.
