That Spring | 261

young, born, say, between 1915 and 1922, that same "young
and unknown tribe" which hustling—bustling Lunacharsky had
hurried to greet in the name of Pushkin. Most of them got into
Vlasov military units through that same blind chance which led
their comrades in a neighboring camp to get into the spy thing
—it all depended on which recruiter had gone where.

The recruiters had explained to them jeeringly—or rather, it
would have been jeering if it hadn‘t been the truth: "Stalin has
renounced you! Stalin doesn‘t give a damn about you!"

Soviet law had outlawed them even before they outlawed
themselves.

So they signed up—some of them simply to get out of a death
camp, others with the hope of going over to the partisans. (And
some of them did! And fought side by side with the partisans‘!
But according to Stalin‘s rules that didn‘t soften their sentences
in the least.) However, in the case of some, the shame of 1941,
that stunning defeat after long, long years of braggadocio, ate at
their hearts. Some believed that the primary guilt for those in—
human POW camps belonged to Stalin. They, too, wanted the
chance to speak out about themselves and their awful experi—
ence: to affirm that they, too, were particles of Russia, and
wanted to influence Russia‘s future, and not to be the puppets of
other people‘s mistakes.

But fate played them an even bitterer trick, and they became
more abject pawns than before. The Germans, in their shallow
stupidity and self—importance, allowed them only to die for the
German Reich, but denied them the right to plan an independent
destiny for Russia.

And the Allies were two thousand versts away—and anyway,
what kind of allies would they indeed turn out to be?

The term "Vlasovite" in our country has the same force as
the word "sewage." We feel we are dirtying our mouths merely
by pronouncing it, and therefore no one dares utter a sentence
with "Vlasovite" as its subject.

But that is no way to write history. Now, a quarter of a cen—
tury later, when most of them have perished in camps and those
who have survived are living out their lives in the Far North, I
would like to issue a reminder, through these pages, that this
was a phenomenon totally unheard of in all world history: that
