158 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

that very night! In the morning, Ryumin, bypassing Abakumov
and without his knowledge, telephoned the Central Committee
and asked for an appointment with Stalin‘! (My own opinion,
however, is that this was not his most decisive step. Ryumin‘s
decisive action, following which his life hung in the balance, was
in not going along with Abakumov earlier. And perhaps in hav—
ing Etinger killed that same night. Who knows the secrets of those
courtyards! Had Ryumin‘s contact with Stalin begun earlier
perhaps?) Stalin received Ryumin, set in motion the "doctors‘
case" and arrested Abakumov. From that point on it would seem
that Ryumin conducted the "doctors‘ case" independently of
and even despite Beria! There were signs before Stalin‘s death
that Beria was in danger—and perhaps it was he who arranged
to have Stalin done away with. One of the first acts of the new
government was to dismiss the "doctors‘ case." At that time
Ryumin was arrested (while Beria was still in power), but
Abakumov was not released! At the Lubyanka a new order of
things was introduced. And for the first time in its entire existence
a prosecutor crossed its threshold—D. Terekhov. Imprisoned,
Ryumin was fidgety and subservient: "I am not guilty. I am here
for no reason." He asked to be interrogated. As was his custom,
he was sucking a hard candy at the time, and when Terekhov
rebuked him for it, he spat it out on the palm of his hand. "Pardon
me." As we have already reported, Abakumov roared with laugh—
ter: "Hocus—pocus!" Terekhov showed him the document author—
izing him to inspect the Internal Prison of the Ministry of State
Security. Abakumov brushed it away: "You can forge five hun—
dred of those!" As an organizational "patriot," he was principally
offended not by being in prison but by this encroachment on the
power of the Organs, which could not be subordinate to anything
in the world! In July, 1953, Ryumin was tried in Moscow and
shot. And Abakumov remained in prison! During one interroga—
tion he said to Terekhov: "Your eyes are too beautiful. I am
going to be sorry to have to shoot you!"‘ Leave my case alone.
Leave it while you still have time." On another occasion Terekhov

17. This is true. On the whole, D. Terekhov is a man of uncommon strength
of will and courage (which were what was required in bringing the big Stalinists
to justice in an uneasy situation). And he evidently has a lively mind as well.
If Khrushchev‘s reforms had been more thoroughgoing and consistent, Tere—
khov might have excelled in carrying them out. That is how historic leaders fail
to materialize in our country.
