In the Engine Room | 279

"In that case, allow me to write an appeal right here. After all,
the sentence is unjust."

"As provided by regulations," the major assented with a nod,
placing my sheet of paper on the left—hand pile.

"Let‘s move along," commanded the jailer.

And I moved along.

(I had not really shown much initiative. Georgi Tenno, who,
to be sure, had been handed a paper worth twenty—five years,
answered: "After all, this is a life sentence. In olden times they
used to beat the drums and assemble a crowd when a person was
given a life sentence. And here it‘s like being on a list for a soap
ration—twenty—five years and run along!"

Arnold Rappoport took the pen and wrote on the back of the
verdict: "I protest categorically this terroristic, illegal sentence
and demand immediate release." The officer who had handed it
to him had at first waited patiently, but when he read what Rap—
poport had written, he was enraged and tore up the paper with the
note on it. So what! The term remained in force anyway. This was
just a copy.

Vera Korneyeva was expecting fiffteen years and she saw with
delight that there was a typo on the official sheet—it read only
five. She laughed her luminous laugh and hurried to sign before
they took it back. The officer looked at her dubiously: "Do you
really understand what I read to you?" "Yes, yes, thank you
very much. Five years in corrective—labor camps."

The ten—year sentence of Janos Rozsas, a Hungarian, was read
to him in the corridor in Russian, without any translation. He
signed it, not knowing it was his sentence, and he waited a long
time afterward for his trial. Still later, when he was in camp, he
recalled the incident very vaguely and realized what had hap—
pened.)

I returned to the box with a smile. It was strange. Each minute
I became jollier and more relieved. Everyone was returning with
"ten—ruble bills," including Valentin. The lightest term in our
group that day had been given the bookkeeper who had gone out
of his mind. He was still, in fact, beside himself. And the lightest
term after his was mine.

In the splashes of sun and the July breeze, the little twig out—
side the window continued to bob up and down as gaily as before.
We chattered boisterously. Here and there, more and more fre—
