464 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

Yet the prisoners had defended the regimen successfully! And
for a whole year no one spoke of changing it.

For the whole of 1924, yes. But toward the end of the year,
insistent rumors circulated again that they were planning to in—
troduce a new system in December. The Dragon had grown
hungry again. He wanted new victims. So even though the three
monasteries in which socialists were confined—Savvatyevsky,
Troitsky, and Muksalmsky—were on separate islands, they man—
aged, by conspiratorial methods, to reach an agreement. that all
the party fractions in all three monasteries would on one and the
same day deliver an ultimatum to Moscow and to the Solovki ad—
ministration: They must either be removed from the Solovetsky
Islands before navigation stopped or else the previous political
regimen must be left unchanged. The ultimatum stipulated a
time limit of two weeks, and then all three prisons would go on a
hunger strike.

This kind of unity compelled attention. It wasn‘t the sort of
thing you could allow to go in one ear and out the other. One
day before the time limit expired, Eichmans visited each monas—
tery and announced that Moscow had refused. And on the ap—
pointed day a hunger strike began (not a dry hunger strike—
water was allowed) in all three monastery prisons (which were
now unable to communicate with each other). In Savvatyevsky,
about two hundred people struck. Those who fell ill were ex—
empted from striking. A doctor from among the prisoners ex—
amined the strikers every day. A collective hunger strike is always
more difficult to carry out than an individual one; after all, the
weakest rather than the strongest of the strikers can determine its
outcome. The only point to a hunger strike is to carry it out with
implacable determination and in such a way that everyone knows
everyone else involved personally and trusts them fully. Given
various party fractions, given several hundred people, both dis—
agreements and moral anguish on other people‘s behalf were in—
evitable. After fifteen days, it was necessary to vote by secret
ballot in Savvatyevsky—the urn with the ballots was taken from
room to room—whether to continue or to lift the hunger strike.

And Moscow and Eichmans waited them out! After all, they
were well fed, and there wasn‘t a peep from the capital news—
papers about the hunger strike, and there were no student pro—
