376 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

in the summer of 1930 that someone found or suggested Ramzin,
the Director of the Thermal Engineering Institute! He was
arrested, and in three months a magnificent drama was prepared
and performed, the genuine perfection of our justice and an un—
attainable model for world justice.

L. The Promparty (Industrial Party) Trial—
November 25—December 7, 1930

This case was tried at a Special Assize of the Supreme Court,
with the same Vyshinsky, the same Antonov—Saratovsky, and
that same favorite of ours, Krylenko.

This time none of those "technical reasons" arose to prevent
the reader‘s being offered a full stenographic report of the trial‘
or to prohibit the attendance of foreign correspondents.

There was a majesty of concept: all the nation‘s industry, all
its branches and planning organs, sat on the defendants‘ benches.
(However, only the eyes of the man who arranged it all could
see the crevices into which the mining industry and railroad
transportation had disappeared.) At the same time there was a
thrift in the use of material: there were only eight defendants in
all. (The mistakes of the Shakhty trial had been taken into
account.)

You are going to exclaim: Can eight men represent the en—
tire industry of the country? Yes, indeed; we have more even
than we need. Three out of eight are solely in textiles, represent—
ing the industrial branch most important for national defense. But
there were, no doubt, crowds of witnesses? Just seven in all, who
were exactly the same sort of wreckers as the defendants and were
also prisoners. But there were no doubt bales of documents that
exposed them? Drawings? Projects? Directives? Summaries of
results? Proposals? Dispatches? Private correspondence? No,
not one! You mean to say, Not even one tiny piece of paper?
How could the GPU let that sort of thing get by? They had
arrested all those people, and they hadn‘t even grabbed one little
piece of paper? "There had been a lot," but "it had all been
destroyed." Because "there was no place to keep the files." At the

7. Protsess Prompartii (The Trial of the Promparty), Moscow, Sovetskoye
Zakonodatelstvo (Soviet Legislation Publishing House), 1931.
