442 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

more, that accursed intelligentsia). So how could it depend on
you? To be on such a list amounted to execution for each one.

And so they shot all of them. But here is how Konstantin
Ivanovich Strakhovich, a very important Russian scientist in
hydrodynamics, remained alive: Some even higher bigwigs in
State Security were dissatisfied because the list was too small and
not enough people were being shot. Therefore Strakhovich was
selected as a suitable center for uncovering a new organization.
He was summoned by Captain Altshuller: "What‘s this all about?
Did you rush to confess everything so that you‘d get shot and
thereby conceal the underground government? What was your
role in it?" Thus Strakhovich found himself in a new round of
interrogations while he remained on death row. He proposed
that they consider him the underground Minister of Education.
(He wanted to get it over with as soon as possible!) But that
wasn‘t good enough for Altshuller. The interrogation continued,
and by this time Ignatovsky‘s group was being executed. During
one of the interrogation sessions Strakhovich got angry. It wasn‘t
that he wanted to live but that he was tired of dying, and, more
than anything else, the lies made him sick. And so while he was
being cross—questioned in the presence of some Security police
bigwig, he pounded on the table: "You are the ones who ought
to be shot. I am not going to lie any longer. I take back all my
testimony." And his outburst helped! Not only did they stop
interrogating him, but they forgot about him in his death cell for
a long time.

In all probability an outburst of desperation in the midst of
general submissiveness will always help.

Thus many were shot—thousands at first, then hundreds of
thousands. We divide, we multiply, we sigh, we curse. But still
and all, these are just numbers. They overwhelm the mind and
then are easily forgotten. And if someday the relatives of those
who had been shot were to send one publisher photographs of
their executed kin, and an album of those photographs were to
be published in several volumes, then just by leafing through
them and looking into the extinguished eyes we would learn
much that would be valuable for the rest of our lives. Such read—
ing, almost without words, would leave a deep mark on our
hearts for all eternity.
