The Law Matures | 397

So then where is the riddle? How they were worked over? Very
simply: Do you want to live? (And even those who don‘t care
about themselves care about their children or grandchildren.)
Do you understand that it takes absolutely no effort to have you
shot, without your ever leaving the courtyards of the GPU? (And
there was no doubt whatever about that. Whoever hadn‘t yet
learned it would be given a course in being ground down by the
Lubyanka.) But it is useful both for you and for us to have you
act out a certain drama, the text for which you, as specialists,
are going to write yourselves, and we, as prosecutors, are going
to learn by heart . . . and we will try to remember the technical
terms. (Krylenko sometimes made mistakes during the trial. He
said "freight car axle" instead of "locomotive axle.") It will be
unpleasant to perform and you will feel ashamed, but you just
have to suffer through it. After all, it is better to live. And what
assurance have we that you won‘t shoot us afterward? Why
should we take vengeance on you? You are excellent specialists
and you have not committed any crimes and we value you. Look
at how many wrecking trials there have been; you‘ll see that
no one who behaved has been shot. (Mercy for the defendants
who cooperated in one trial was an important prerequisite for
the success of the next. And hope was transmitted via this chain
right up to Zinoviev and Kamenev themselves.) But the under—
standing is that you have to carry out all our conditions to the
very last! The trial must work for the good of socialist society.

And the defendants would fulfill all the conditions.

Thus they served up all the subtlety of engineers‘ intellectual
opposition as dirty wrecking on a level low enough to be com—
prehensible to the last illiterate in the country. (But they had not
yet descended to the level of ground glass in the food of the
workers. The prosecutors had not yet thought that one up.)

A further theme was ideological motivation. Had they begun
to wreck? It was the result of a hostile motivation. And now they
jointly collaborated in confessing? It was once again the result
of ideological motivation, for they had been converted (in
prison) by the blazing blast—furnace face of the third year of the
Five—Year Plan! Although in their last words they begged for
their lives, that wasn‘t the main thing for them. (Fedotov: "There
is no forgiveness for us. The prosecutor is right!") The main
