58 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

agricultural activity, a new type of harvesting! The wave of those
caught doing this was not small—it included many tens of
thousands of peasants, many of them not even adults but boys,
girls, and small children whose elders had sent them out at night
to snip, because they had no hope of receiving anything from the
collective farm for their daytime labor. For this bitter and not
very productive occupation (an extreme of poverty to which the
peasants had not been driven even in serfdom) the courts handed
out a full measure: fen years for what ranked as an especially
dangerous theft of socialist property under the notorious law of
August 7, 1932—which in prisoners‘ lingo was known simply
as the law of Seven—eighths.

This law of "Seven—eighths" produced another big, separate
wave from the construction projects of the First and Second
Five—Year Plans, from transport, trade, and industry. Big thefts
were turned over to the NKVD. This wave must further be kept
in mind as one that kept on flowing steadily for the next fifteen
years, until 1947, especially during the war years. (Then in 1947
the original law was expanded and made more harsh.)

Now at last we can catch our breath! Now at last all the mass
waves are coming to an end! Comrade Molotov said on May 17,
1933: "We do not see our task as being mass repressions."
Whew! At last! Begone, nighttime fears! But what‘s that dog
howling out there? Go get ‘em. Go get ‘em.

And here we are! The Kirov wave from Leningrad has begun.
While it lasted the tension was acknowledged to be so great that
special staffs of the NKVD were set up in each and every Dis—
trict Executive Committee of the city and an "accelerated"
judicial procedure was introduced. (Even earlier, it had not been
famous for being slow.) And there was no right of appeal.
(There had been no appeal earlier.) It is also believed that one—
quarter of Leningrad was purged—cleaned out—in 1934—1935.
Let this estimate be disproved by those who have the exact
statistics and are willing to publish them. (To be sure, this wave
took in much more than Leningrad alone. It had a substantial
impact on the rest of the country in a form that was consistent
though chaotic: the firing from the civil service of all those
still left there whose fathers had been priests, all former noble—
women, and all persons having relatives abroad. )

Among such lashing waves as this, certain modest, changeless
