8 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

make out an inventory of confiscated property or seal a room or
apartment; to arrest the wife after the husband and send the
children to an orphanage, or to send the rest of the family into
exile, or to send the old folks to a labor camp too.

No, no: arrests vary widely in form. In 1926 Irma Mendel, a
Hungarian, obtained through the Comintern two front—row
tickets to the Bolshoi Theatre. Interrogator Klegel was courting
her at the time and she invited him to go with her. They sat
through the show very affectionately, and when it was over he
took her—straight to the Lubyanka. And if on a flowering June
day in 1927 on Kuznetsky Most, the plump—cheeked, redheaded
beauty Anna Skripnikova, who had just bought some navy—blue
material for a dress, climbed into a hansom cab with a young
man—about—town, you can be sure it wasn‘t a lovers‘ tryst at all, as
the cabman understood very well and showed by his frown (he
knew the Organs don‘t pay). It was an arrest. In just a moment
they would turn on the Lubyanka and enter the black maw of the
gates. And if, some twenty—two springs later, Navy Captain
Second Rank Boris Burkovsky, wearing a white tunic and a trace
of expensive eau de cologne, was buying a cake for a young lady,
do not take an oath that the cake would ever reach the young
lady and not be sliced up instead by the knives of the men search—
ing the captain and then delivered to him in his first cell. No, one
certainly cannot say that daylight arrest, arrest during a journey,
or arrest in the middle of a crowd has ever been neglected in our
country. However, it has always been clean—cut—and, most sur—
prising of all, the victims, in cooperation with the Security men,
have conducted themselves in the noblest conceivable manner, so
as to spare the living from witnessing the death of the condemned.

Not everyone can be arrested at home, with a preliminary
knock at the door (and if there is a knock, then it has to be the
house manager or else the postman). And not everyone can be
arrested at work either. If the person to be arrested is vicious,
then it‘s better to seize him outside his ordinary milieu—away
from his family and colleagues, from those who share his views,
from any hiding places. It is essential that he have no chance to
destroy, hide, or pass on anything to anyone. VIP‘s in the military
or the Party were sometimes first given—new assignments, en—
sconced in a private railway car, and then arrested en route. Some
