The Law Matures | 415

and then ordered Sokolnikov to be taken away. And he said to
Bukharin in a friendly tone: "He lies in his teeth, the whore!"

Despite that, the newspapers continued to report the indigna—
tion of the masses. Bukharin telephoned the Central Committee.
Bukharin wrote letters beginning "Dear Koba," in which he
begged that the accusations against him be publicly denied. And
then the prosecutor‘s office published a roundabout declaration:
"Objective proofs for the indictment of Bukharin have not been
found."

Radek telephoned him in the fall, wanting to see him. Bukharin
shunned him: We are both being accused; why add another
cloud? But their Izvest/ya country houses were next to each other,
and Radek dropped in on him one evening: "No matter what I
may say later on, please know that I am not to blame for anything.
And anyway you will come out of it whole: you were not con—
nected with the Trotskyites."

And Bukharin believed he would come out of it whole and
that he would not be expelled from the Party. For that would be
monstrous! In actuality, he had always been hostile to the
Trotskyites: they had put themselves outside the Party and look
what had come of it! They had to stick together. Even if they
made mistakes, they had to stick together on that too.

At the November demonstration (his farewell to Red Square),
he and his wife went to the reviewing stand for guests on his
newspaper editor‘s press card. All at once an armed soldier came
up to him. His heart stopped! They were going to do it here? At
a time like this? No. The soldier saluted: "Comrade Stalin is sur—
prised at your being here. He asks you to take your place on the
mausoleum."

And that‘s the way they tossed him back and forth from hot
to cold for the entire half—year. On December 5 they adopted the
Bukharin constitution with fanfare and celebration and named
it the Stalinist Constitution for all eternity. At the December
Plenum of the Central Committee, they brought in Pyatakoyv,
with his teeth knocked out, and not a bit like himself. Behind
his back stood silent Chekists (Yagoda men, and Yagoda, after
all, was also being tested and prepared for a role). Pyatakov
delivered himself of the most repulsive sort of testimony against
Bukharin and Rykov, both of whom were sitting right there
