The Law as a Child | 315

and, in fact, did not even draw the line at hauling off silver spoons
and goblets, and even ordinary glassware, from the Cheka. (And
how did all these objects get to the Cheka?) "And this was where
his attention was concentrated, rather than in the direction of
ideas and ideology, and this was what he took from the revolu—
tionary movement." (In the very act of repudiating the bribes he
had accepted, this leading Chekist, without blinking, volunteered
the lie that he possessed 200,000 rubles from an inheritance in a
Chicago bank! Evidently, as far as he was concerned, there was
no conflict between such a circumstance and world revolution!)

Now how did he propose to make proper use of his super—
human right to arrest anyone at all and release anyone at all?
Clearly, one had to find a fish with golden roe—and in 1918
there were not a few such fish in the nets. (After all, the Revolu—
tion had been carried out too quickly; they hadn‘t found every—
thing—how many precious stones, necklaces, bracelets, rings,
and earrings the bourgeois ladies had managed to hide away!)
Then one had to make contact with the relatives of those who
had been arrested through some reliable middleman.

Such characters also pass before us at the trial. There was Us—
penskaya, a woman of twenty—two. She had graduated from the St.
Petersburg Gymnasium, but hadn‘t gone on to the university—
the Soviets had come to power—and so, in the spring of 1918,
Uspenskaya appeared at the Cheka to offer her services as an in—
former. She qualified on the basis of her appearance, and they
accepted her.

Krylenko has this to say about informing, which in those days
had a different label: "For ourselves, we see nothing shameful in
it, we consider this to be our duty . . . the work itself is not dis—
graceful; once a person admits that this work is necessary in the
interests of the Revolution, then he must do it.""" But, alas, it
turned out that Uspenskaya had no political credo! That‘s what
was awful. She declared: "I agreed in order to be paid a fixed
percentage" on the cases which were turned up, and, beyond that,
"to split 50—50" with someone else . . . whom the court protected
and instructed her not to identify. Krylenko put it in his own
words: "Uspenskaya was not a staff member of the Cheka but
worked at piece rates.""° And, incidentally, the accuser, under—

35. Ibid., p. 513. (My italics.)
36. Ibid., p. 507.
