The Law Becomes a Man | 339

psychology" of the officials of the Workers‘ and Peasants‘ Inspec—
tion and of the trade unions was that the majority of the workers
at the pumping stations "had been infected with petty—bourgeois
psychology" and, unable to recognize Oldenborger‘s sabotage, had
come to his defense. At this point, elections to the Moscow Soviet
were being held and the workers nominated Oldenborger as the
candidate of the water—supply system, against whom, of course,
the Party cell backed its own Party candidate. However, this
turned out to be futile because of the chief engineer‘s fraudulent
authority with the workers,. Nonetheless, the Party cell brought up
the question with the District Party Committee, on all levels, and
announced at a general meeting that "Oldenborger is the center
and soul of sabotage, and will be our political enemy in the
Moscow Soviet!" The workers responded with an uproar and
shouts of "Untrue! Lies!" And at that point the secretary of the
Party Committee, Comrade Sedelnikov, flung right in the faces
of the thousand—headed proletariat there: "I am not even going
to talk to such Black Hundred, reactionary pogrom—makers."
That is to say: We‘ll talk to you somewhere else.

Party measures were also taken: they expelled the chief
engineer from—no less—the collegium for administration of the
water system, and kept him under constant investigation; con—
tinually summoned him before a multitude of commissions and
subcommissions; kept interrogating him and giving him as—
signments that were to be urgently carried out. Every time he
failed to appear, it was entered in the record "in case of a future
trial." And through the Council of Labor and Defense (Chair—
man—Comrade Lenin) they got an "Extraordinary Troika"
appointed to the water system. (It consisted of representatives of
the RKI, the Council of Trade Unions, and Comrade Kuibyshev.)

And for the fourth year the water kept right on flowing through
the pipes. And Moscovites kept on drinking it and didn‘t notice
anything wrong. .

Then Comrade Sedelnikov wrote an article for the newspaper
Ekonomicheskaya Zhizn: "In view of the rumors disturbing the
public in regard to the catastrophic state of the water mains . . ."
and he reported many new and alarming rumors—even that the
water system was pumping water underground and was intention—
ally washing away the foundations of all Moscow." (Set there
by Ivan Kalita in the fourteenth century.) They summoned a
