494 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

as the upper limit the number of unremoved corpses which can
be contained in the total volume of the compartment, given the
possibility of packing them in at leisure.

V. A. Korneyeva traveled from Moscow in a compartment that
held thirty women—most of them withered old women, exiled for
their religious beliefs (on arrival all these women, except two,
were immediately put in the hospital). Nobody died in the com—
partment because several of the prisoners were young, well—devel—
oped, good—looking girls, arrested "for going out with foreigners."
These girls took it upon themselves to shame the convoy: "You
ought to be ashamed to transport them this way! These are your
own mothers!" It probably wasn‘t so much their moral argument
as their attractive appearance which produced a reaction in the
convoy guards, and they did move several of the old women out
—to the punishment cell. But the punishment cell in a Stolypin
car is no punishment; it is a blessing. Of five prisoner compart—
ments, four are used as general cells, and the fifth is set aside and
divided in two halves—two narrow half—compartments with one
lower and one upper berth, like those the conductors have. These
punishment cells serve to isolate prisoners; three or four travel
in them at a time, and this gives both comfort and space.

No, it is not intentionally to torture them with thirst that the
exhausted and overcrowded prisoners are fed not soup but salt
herring or dry smoked Caspian carp for the whole of their trip in
the Stolypin car. (This was exactly how it was in all the years,
the thirties and the fifties, winter and summer, in Siberia and the
Ukraine, and it isn‘t even necessary to cite examples.) It was not
to torture them with thirst—but just you tell me what these raga—
muffins were to be fed anyway while being moved around. They
were not supposed to get hot meals in prisoner—transport railroad
cars. (True, there was a kitchen in one of the Stolypin car com—
partments, but that was only for the convoy.) You couldn‘t just
give the prisoners raw grits, and you couldn‘t give them raw cod—
fish either, nor could you give them canned meat because they
might stuff themselves. Herring was just the thing, with a piece of
bread—and what else did they need?

Go ahead, take your half a herring while they are handing it
out, and be glad you got it. If you‘re smart, you aren‘t going
to eat that herring; just be patient, wait, hide it in your pocket,
