The Ships of the Archipelago | 525

And forcing prisoners to sit down was also a calculated
maneuver. If you are sitting on your rear end on the ground, so
that your knees tower in front of you, then your center of gravity
is well back of your legs, and it is difficult to get up and im—
possible to jump up. And more than that, they would make us
sit as tightly massed together as possible so that we‘d be in each
other‘s way. And if all of us wanted to attack the convoy to—
gether, they would have mowed us down before we got moving.

They had us sitting there to wait for the Black Maria (it trans—
ports the prisoners in batches, you couldn‘t get them all in at
once), or else to be herded off on foot. They would try to sit us
down someplace hidden so that fewer free people would see us,
but at times they did make the prisoners sit right there awkwardly
on the platform or in an open square. (That is how it was in
Kuibyshev.) And it is a difficult experience for the free people:
we stare at them quite freely and openly with a totally sincere
gaze, but how are they supposed to look at us? With hatred?
Their consciences don‘t permit it. (After all, only the Yermilovs
believe that people were imprisoned ‘"for cause.") With sym—
pathy? With pity? Be careful, someone will take down your name
and they‘ll set you up for a prison term too; it‘s that simple. And
our proud free citizens (as in Mayakovsky: "Read it, envy me,
I am a citizen") drop their guilty heads and try not to see us at
all, as if the place were empty. The old women are bolder than
the rest. You couldn‘t turn them bad. They believe in God. And
they would break off a piece of bread from their meager loaf
and throw it to us. And old camp hands—nonpolitical offenders,
of course—weren‘t afraid either. All camp veterans knew the say—
ing: "Whoever hasn‘t been there yet will get there, and whoever
was there won‘t forget it." And look, they‘d toss over a pack of
cigarettes, hoping that someone might do the same for them
during their next term. And the old woman‘s bread wouldn‘t
quite carry far enough, what with her weak arm, and it would
fall short, whereas the pack of cigarettes would arch through the
air right into our midst, and the convoy guards would im—
mediately work the bolts of their rifles—pointing them at the old
woman, at kindness, at the bread: "Come on, old woman, run
along."

And the holy bread, broken in two, was left to lie in the dust
while we were driven off.
