366 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

as the reinvestigation, when all the loose ends were gathered up
and all the bolts tightened, was really the investigation. The dis—
organized "materials provided by the Organs for inquiry and
unverified by the investigation have much less value as proof
than the materials provided by the skillfully directed investiga—
tion."*5

Clever, wasn‘t it? Just try grinding that up in your mortar!

To be practical about it, Krylenko no doubt resented having
to spend half a year getting ready for this trial, then another two
months barking at the defendants, and then having to drag out
his summation for fifteen hours, when all these defendants "had
more than once been in the hands of the extraordinary Organs at
times when these Organs had extraordinary powers; but, thanks to
some circumstances or other, they had succeeded in surviving."**
So now Krylenko had to slave away to try and get them executed
legally.

There was, of course, "only one possible verdict—execution
for every last one of them"!*" But Krylenko qualifies this gen—
erously. Because this case is being watched by the whole world,
the prosecutor‘s demand "does not constitute a directive to the
court" which the latter would "be obliged to accept immediately
for consideration or decision."**

What a fine court, too, that requires such an explanation!

And, indeed, the tribunal did demonstrate its daring in the
sentences it imposed: it did not hand down the death penalty
for "every last one of them," but for fourteen only. Most of the
rest got prison and camp sentences, while sentences in the form
of productive labor were imposed on another hundred.

And just remember, reader, remember: "All the other courts
of the Republic watch what the Supreme Tribunal does. It pro—
vides them with guidelines.""

The sentences of the Verkhtrib are used "as directives for their
guidance."*" As to how many more would now be railroaded in
the provinces, you can figure that out for yourself.

And, probably, on appeal the decision of the Presidium of the
All—Russian Central Executive Committee was worth the whole

35. Ibid., p. 238. 38. Ibid., p. 319.
36. Ibid., p. 322. 39. Ibid., p. 407.
37. Ibid., p. 326. 40. Ibid., p. 409.
