576 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

prisoners in their summer clothes marched through deep snow
on a totally untraveled road somewhere into the dark taiga, nary
a light ahead. The northern lights gleamed—for them it was their
first and probably their last view of them. The fir trees crackled
in the frost. The ill—shod prisoners paced and trod down the
snow, their feet and legs growing numb from the cold.

Or, as another example, here is a January, 1945, arrival at
Pechora. ("Our armies have captured Warsaw! Our armies have
cut off East Prussia!") An empty snowy field. The prisoners were
tossed out of the cars, made to sit down in the snow by sixes,
painstakingly counted off, miscounted, and counted again. They
were ordered to stand up and then were harried through a snowy
virgin waste for four miles. This prisoner transport was also from
the south—from Moldavia. And everyone was wearing leather
shoes. The police dogs were right on their heels, and the dogs
pushed the zeks in the last row with their paws on their backs,
breathing on the backs of their heads. (Two priests were in that
row—old gray—haired Father Fyodor Florya and young Father
Viktor Shipovalnikov, who was helping to hold him up.) What
a use for police dogs? No, what self—restraint it showed on the
dogs‘ part! After all, they wanted to bite so badly!

Finally they arrived. There was a camp reception bath; they
had to undress in one cabin, run across the yard naked, and wash
in another. But all this was bearable now: the worst was over.
They had arrived. Twilight fell. And all of a sudden it was learned
there was no room for them; the camp wasn‘t ready to receive the
prisoner transport. And after the bath, the prisoners were again
formed up, counted, surrounded by dogs, and were marched back
to their prisoner—transport train all those four miles, but this time
in the dark. And the car doors had been left open all those hours,
and had lost even their earlier, pitiful measure of warmth, and
then all the coal had been burned up by the end of the journey
and there was nowhere to get any more now. And in these
circumstances, they froze all night and in the morning were
given dried carp (and anyone who wanted to drink could chew
snow), and then marched back along the same road again.

And this, after all, was an episode with a happy ending. In this
case, the camp at least exisfed. If it couldn‘t accept them today,
it would tomorrow. But it was not at all unusual for the red trains
