That Spring | 255

in winter camouflage cloaks that covered our overcoats and caps.
Near Malye Kozlovichi, I was told, an interesting encounter took
place. As the soldiers dashed back and forth among the pines,
things got confused, and two soldiers lay down next to one
another. No longer very accurately oriented, ‘they kept shooting
at someone, somewhere over there. Both had Soviet automatic
pistols. They shared their cartridges, praised one another, and
together swore at the grease freezing on their automatic pistols.
Finally, their pistols stopped firing altogether, and they decided
to take a break and light up. They pulled back their white hoods
—and at the same instant each saw the other‘s cap . . . the eagle
and the star. They jumped up! Their automatic pistols still
refused to fire! Grabbing them by the barrel and swinging them
like clubs, they began to go at each other. This, if you will, was
not politics and not the Motherland, but just sheer caveman
distrust: If I take pity on him, he is going to kill me.

In East Prussia, a trio of captured Vlasov men was being
marched along the roadside a few steps away from me. At that
moment a T—34 tank thundered down the highway. Suddenly one
of the captives twisted around and dived underneath the tank.
The tank veered, but the edge of its track crushed him neverthe—
less. The broken man lay writhing, bloody foam coming from
his mouth. And one could certainly understand him! He pre—
ferred a soldier‘s death to being hanged in a dungeon.

They had no choice. There was no other way for them to fight.
They had no chance to find a way out, to safeguard their lives, by
some more cautious mode of fighting. If "pure" surrender was
considered unforgivable treason to the Motherland, then what
about those who had taken up enemy arms? Our propaganda,
in all its crudity, explained their conduct as: (1) treason (was it
biologically based? carried in the bloodstream?) ; or (2) coward—
ice—which it certainly was not! A coward tries to find a spot
where things are easy, soft, safe. And men could be induced to
enter the Wehrmacht‘s Viasov detachments only in the last ex—
tremity, only at the limit of desperation, only out of inexhaustible
hatred of the Soviet regime, only with total contempt for their
own safety. For they knew they would never have the faintest
glimpse of mercy! When we captured them, we shot them as soon
as the first intelligible Russian word came from their mouths. In
