The Interrogation | 109

behind your back!" They led him out of the cell, up the stairs
quickly, into the interrogator‘s office. The guard left. But the
interrogator, without asking one single question, and sometimes
without even allowing Chebotaryev to sit down, would pick up
the telephone: "Take away the prisoner from 107!" And so they
came to get him and took him back to his cell. No sooner had he
lain down on his board bunk than the lock rattled: "Chebotaryev!
To interrogation. Hands behind your back!" And when he got
there: "Take away the prisoner from 107!"

For that matter, the methods of bringing pressure to bear can
begin a long time before the interrogator‘s office.

15. Prison begins with the box, in other words, what amounts
to a closet or packing case. The human being who has just been
taken from freedom, still in a state of inner turmoil, ready to
explain, to argue, to struggle, is, when he first sets foot in prison,
clapped into a "box," which sometimes has a lamp and a place
where he can sit down, but which sometimes is dark and con—
structed in such a way that he can only stand up and even then
is squeezed against the door. And he is held there for several
hours, or for half a day, or a day. During those hours he knows
absolutely nothing! Will he perhaps be confined there all his
life? He has never in his life encountered anything like this, and
he cannot guess at the outcome. Those first hours are passing
when everything inside him is still ablaze from the unstilled
storm in his heart. Some become despondent—and that‘s the
time to subject them to their first interrogation. Others become
angry—and that, too, is all to the good, for they may insult the
interrogator right at the start or make a slip, and it will be all the
easier to cook up their case.

16. When boxes were in short supply, they used to have an—
other method. In the Novocherkassk NKVD, Yelena Strutin—
skaya was forced to remain seated on a stool in the corridor for
six days in such a way that she did not lean against anything,
did not sleep, did not fall off, and did not get up from it. Six
days! Just try to sit that way for six hours!

Then again, as a variation, the prisoner can be forced to sit
on a tall chair, of the kind used in laboratories, so that his feet
do not reach the floor. They become very numb in this position.
He is left sitting that way from eight to ten hours.
