The Law as a Child | 319

and then of killing a comrade in order to use his passport. The
rest of Kosyrev‘s convictions were for swindling, and in all he
spent many years at hard labor. (One could understand his
desire for a luxurious life.) And he had only been freed by the
Tsarist amnesties.

At that point, the stern and righteous voices of the major
Chekists interrupted the chief accuser; they pointed out to him
that those courts which had convicted Kosyrevy were courts of
the bourgeoisie and landowners and did not merit being noticed
in our new society. But what happened? The shavetail, going
overboard, poured forth from the chief accuser‘s rostrum a tirade
so ideologically faulty that in our exposition of this harmonious
series of cases tried by the tribunals, citing it is to strike a dis—
cordant note.

"If there was anything good in the old Tsarist court system,
it was only trial by jury. . . . One could always have confidence
in the jurors‘ decisions and a minimum of judicial error was to
be found in them."*"

It was all the more vexing to hear this sort of thing from
Comrade Krylenko because just three months before, at the trial
of the provocateur R. Malinovsky, a former favorite of the Com—
munist Party leadership, who, notwithstanding his four criminal
convictions in the past, had been co—opted into the Central
Committee by the leadership and appointed to the Duma, the
accusing power had taken an impeccable class stand.

"Every crime is the result of a given social system, and in
these terms criminal convictions under the laws of a capitalist
society and in Tsarist times do not, in our eyes, constitute a fact
branding a person with an indelible mark once and for all. . . .
We know of many examples of persons in our ranks branded
by such facts in the past, but we have never drawn the con—
clusion that it was necessary to remove such a person from our
milieu. 4 person who knows our principles cannot fear that the
existence of previous criminal convictions in his record will
jeopardize his being included in the ranks of the revolution—
aries."**

That is how Comrade Krylenko could speak when in a Party

41. Ibid.
42. Ibid., p. 337.
