Tyurzak | 473

where, either in prerevolutionary Russia, in Italy, or in France,
were the authorities so successful in discouraging hunger strikes
as in the Soviet Union. There was probably no less physical
sacrifice and no less spiritual determination in the hunger strikes
in the second quarter of our century than there had been in the
first. But there was no public opinion in the Soviet Union. And
on that basis the New Type Prison waxed and grew strong. And
instead of easy victories, the prisoners suffered hard—earned de—
feats.

Decades passed and time produced its own results. The hunger
strike—the first and most natural weapon of the prisoner—in
the end became alien and incomprehensible to the prisoners
themselves. Fewer and fewer desired to undertake them. And to
prison administrations the whole thing began to seem either
plain stupidity or else a malicious violation.

When, in 1960, Gennady Smelov, a nonpolitical offender,
declared a lengthy hunger strike in the Leningrad prison, the
prosecutor went to his cell for some reason (perhaps he was
making his regular rounds) and asked him: "Why are you tor—
turing yourself?"

And Smelov replied: "Justice is more precious to me than
life."

This phrase so astonished the prosecutor with its irrelevance
that the very next day Smelov was taken to the Leningrad Special
Hospital (i.e., the insane asylum) for prisoners. And the doctor
there told him:

"We suspect you may be a schizophrenic."

Along the rings of the horn, where it began to narrow to its
point, the former central prisons arose, rechristened, by the be—
ginning of 1937, the "special isolators." The last little weaknesses
were now being squeezed out of the system, the last vestiges of
light and air. And the hunger strike of the tired socialists, their
numbers sparse by now, in the Yaroslavl Penalty Isolator at the
beginning of 1937 was one of their last, desperate efforts.

They were still demanding that everything should be restored
to what it once had been. They were demanding both the election
