The Interrogation | 133

italics here and throughout this quotation are my own.] He in—
formed them only that the manuscripts found at his place had
been brought to him in one package for safekeeping several days
before the search by a certain person whom he did not wish to
name. Therefore the interrogator‘s sole alternative was to turn
the manuscripts over for expert analysis." The experts learned
nothing. (What did he mean—his "sole alternative"? What about
icy water up to the ankles? Or a salt—water douche? Or Ryumin‘s
truncheon?) It would seem that the author of this article, R.
Peresvetov, himself served time for several years and might easily
have enumerated what "alternatives" the interrogator actually
had when confronting the guardian of Lenin‘s "What Are Our
Ministers Thinking Of?"

As S. P. Melgunovy recollects: "That was a Tsarist prison, a
prison of blessed memory, which political prisoners nowadays
can only recall with a feeling almost of gladness.""*

But that is a case of displaced concepts. The yardstick is totally
different. Just as oxcart drivers of Gogol‘s time could not have
imagined the speed of a jet plane, those who have never gone
through the receiving—line meat grinder of Gulag cannot grasp
the true possibilities of interrogation.

We read in Izvestiya for May 24, 1959, that Yulipa Rumyan—
tseva was confined in the internal prison of a Nazi camp while
they tried to find out from her the whereabouts of her husband,
who had escaped from that same camp. She knew, but she refused
to tell! For a reader who is not in the know this is a model of
heroism. For a reader with a bitter Gulag past it‘s a model of in—
efficient interrogation: Yuliya did not die under torture, and she
was not driven insane. A month later she was simply released—
still very much alive and kicking.

All these thoughts about standing firm as a rock were quite
unknown to me in February, 1945. Not only was I not in the
least prepared to cut my cozy ties with earth, I was even quite

29. S. P. Melgunov, Vospominaniya i Dnevniki, (Memoirs and Diaries),
Vol. 1, Paris, 1964, p. 139.
