The Bluecaps | 173

And why is it that for nearly two hundred years the Security
forces have hung onto the color of the heavens? That was what
they wore in Lermontov‘s lifetime—"and you, blue uniforms!"
Then came blue service caps, blue shoulder boards, blue tabs, and
then they were ordered to make themselves less conspicuous,
and the blue brims were hidden from the gratitude of the people
and everything blue on heads and shoulders was made narrower
—until what was left was piping, narrow rims . . . but still blue.

Is this only a masquerade?

Or is it that even blackness must, every so often, however
rarely, partake of the heavens?

It would be beautiful to think so. But when one learns, for
example, the nature of Yagoda‘s striving toward the sacred . . .
An eyewitness from the group around Gorky, who was close to
Yagoda at the time, reports that in the vestibule of the bathhouse
on Yagoda‘s estate near Moscow, ikons were placed so that
Yagoda and his comrades, after undressing, could use them as
targets for revolver practice before going in to take their baths.

Just how are we to understand that? As the act of an evildoer?
What sort of behavior is it? Do such people really exist?

We would prefer to say that such people cannot exist, that
there aren‘t any. It is permissible to portray evildoers in a story
for children, so as to keep the picture simple. But when the great
world literature of the past—Shakespeare, Schiller, Dickens—in—
flates and inflates images of evildoers of the blackest shades, it
seems somewhat farcical and clumsy to our contemporary per—
ception. The trouble lies in the way these classic evildoers are
pictured. They recognize themselves as evildoers, and they know
their souls are black. And they reason: "I cannot live unless I do
evil. So I‘ll set my father against my brother! I‘ll drink the vic—
tim‘s sufferings until I‘m drunk with them!" Tago very precisely
identifies his purposes and his motives as being black and born
of hate.

But no; that‘s not the way it is! To do evil a human being must
first of all believe that what he‘s doing is good, or else that it‘s a
well—considered act in conformity with natural law. Fortunately,
it is in the nature of the human being to seek a fustification for his
actions.

Macbeth‘s self—justifications were feeble—and his conscience
devoured him. Yes, even Iago was a little lamb too. The imagina—
