The Law Matures | 405

he not, in revenge for all the tortures to which he had been sub—
jected, for all the falsehood shoved into his breast, create a
sensational scandal and startle the world? But still:

1. To do so would be to stab the Soviet government in the
back! It would be to negate his entire purpose in life, everything
he had lived for, the whole path he had taken to extricate himself
from mistaken Menshevism and become a right—minded Bol—
shevik.

2. After a scandal like that they wouldn‘t just allow him to
die; they wouldn‘t just shoot him; they would torture him again,
but this time out of vengeance, and drive him insane. But his
body had already been exhausted by tortures. Where could he
find the moral strength to endure new ones? Where could he
unearth the required heroism?

(I wrote down his arguments as his heated words rang out—
this being a most extraordinary chance to get, so to speak, a
"posthumous" explanation from a participant in such a trial.
And I find that it is altogether as though Bukharin or Rykov
were explaining the reasons for their own mysterious submis—
siveness at their trials Theirs were the same sincerity and
honesty, the same devotion to the Party, the same human weak—
ness, the same lack of the moral strength needed to fight back,
because they had no individual position.)

And at the trial Yakubovich not only repeated obediently all
the gray mass of lies which constituted the upper limit of Stalin‘s
imagination—and the imagination of his apprentices and his
tormented defendants. But he also played out his inspired role,
as he had promised Krylenko.

The so—called Foreign Delegation of the Mensheviks—in es—
sence the entire top level of their Central Committee—formally
dissociated themselves from the defendants in a statement pub—
lished in Vorwirts. They declared there that the trial was a
shameful travesty, built on the testimony of provocateurs and
unfortunate defendants forced into it by terror; that the over—
whelming majority of the defendants had left the Party more
than ten years earlier and had never returned; and that absurdly
large sums of money were referred to at the trial, representing
more than the party had ever disposed of. ‘

And Krylenko, having read the article, asked Shvernik to
