The Ships of the Archipelago | 501

moment, no matter how they have oppressed, tortured, and tor—
mented you during the interrogation, it has all originated with the
bluecaps, and you have never confused them with human beings
but have seen in them merely an insolent branch of the service.
But at the same time, even if your cellmates have been totally
different from you in development and experience, and even if
you have quarreled with them, and even if they have squealed on
you, they have all belonged to that same ordinary, sinful, every—
day humanity among which you have spent your whole life.

When you were jammed into a Stolypin compartment, you
expected that here, too, you would encounter only colleagues in
misfortune. All your enemies and oppressors remained on the
other side of the bars, and you certainly did not expect to find
them on this side. And suddenly you lift your eyes to the square
recess in the middle bunk, to that one and only heaven above
you, and up there you see three or four—oh, no, not faces! They
aren‘t monkey muzzZles either, because monkeys‘ muzzles are
much, much decenter and more thoughtful! No, and they aren‘t
simply hideous countenances, since there must be something
human even in them. You see cruel, loathsome snouts up there,
wearing expressions of greed and mockery. Each of them looks
at you like a spider gloating over a fly. Their web is that grating
which imprisons you—and you have been had! They squinch
up their lips, as if they intend to bite you from one side. They hiss
when they speak, enjoying that hissing more than the vowel and
consonant sounds of speech—and the only thing about their
speech that resembles the Russian language is the endings of verbs
and nouns. It is gibberish.

Those strange gorilloids were usually dressed in sleeveless
undershirts. After all, it is stuffy in the Stolypin car. Their sinewy
purple necks, their swelling shoulder muscles, their swarthy
tattooed chests have never suffered prison emaciation. Who are
they? Where do they come from? And suddenly you see a small
cross dangling from one of those necks. Yes, a little aluminum
cross on a string. You are surprised and slightly relieved. That
means there are religious believers among them. How touching!
So nothing terrible is going to happen. But immediately this "be—
liever" belies both his cross and his faith by cursing (and they
curse partly in Russian), and he jabs two protruding fingers,
