The Bluecaps | 147

mentary pay, awards and decorations, promotions in rank, and
the expansion and prosperity of the Organs themselves. If they ran
up high totals, they could loaf when they felt like it, or do poor
work or go out and enjoy themselves at night. And that is just
what they did. Low totals led to their being kicked out, to the
loss of their feedbag. For Stalin could never be convinced that in
any district, or city, or military unit, he might suddenly cease to
have enemies.

That was why they felt no mercy, but, instead, an explosion of
resentment and rage toward those maliciously stubborn‘ prisoners—
who opposed being fitted into the totals, who would not capitulate
to sleeplessness or the punishment cell or hunger. By refusing to
confess they menaced the interrogator‘s personal standing. It was
as though they wanted to bring him down. In such circumstances
all measures were justified! If it‘s to be war, then war it will be!
We‘ll ram the tube down your throat—swallow that salt water!

Excluded by the nature of their work and by deliberate choice
from the higher sphere of human existence, the servitors of the
Blue Institution lived in their lower sphere with all the greater
intensity and avidity. And there they were possessed and directed
by the two strongest instincts of the lower sphere, other than
hunger and sex: greed for power and greed for gain. (Particularly
for power. In recent decades it has turned out to be more im—
portant than money.)

Power is a poison well known for thousands of years. If only
no one were ever to acquire material power over others! But to
the human being who has faith in some force that holds dominion
over all of us, and who is therefore conscious of his own limita—
tions, power is not necessarily fatal. For those, however, who are
unaware of any higher sphere, it is a deadly poison. For them
there is no antidote.

Remember what Tolstoi said about power? Ivan Ilyich had
accepted an official position which gave him authority to destroy
any person he wanted to! All without exception were in his hands,
and anyone, even the most important, could be brought before
him as an accused. (And that is just where our blueboys are!
There is nothing to add to the description.) The consciousness of
this power (and "the possibilities of using it mercifully"—so
Tolstoi qualifies the situation, but this does not in any way apply
