The Law Becomes a Man | 335

the engineers, or spetsy, who were supposed to "outline for them
the correct approach to the problem."‘ And this meant that "it
was not the leaders who were to blame. . . . Those who had
worked out the calculations were to blame, those who had re—
figured the calculations, those who had calculated the plan"—
which consisted of how to produce food and heat with zeros.
Those to blame weren‘t the ones who compelled but the ones
who calculated! If the planning turned out to be inflated, the
spetsy were the ones to blame. Because the figures did not fibe,
"this was the fault of the spetsy, not of the Council of Labor and
Defense" and "not even of the responsible men in charge of
Glavtop—the Main Fuels Committee.""

If there was no coal, firewood, or petroleum, it was because
the spetsy had "brought about a mixed—up, chaotic situation."
And it was their own fault that they hadn‘t resisted the urgent
telephonograms from Rykov and the government—and had
issued and allotted fuels outside the scope of the plan.

The spetsy were to blame for everything. But the proletarian
court was not merciless with them. Their sentences were lenient.
Of course, an inner hostility to those cursed spetsy remains in
proletarian hearts—but one can‘t get along without them; every—
thing goes to rack and ruin. And the tribunal doesn‘t persecute
them, and Krylenko even says that from 1920 on "there is no
question of any sabotage." The spetsy are to blame, but not
out of malice on their part; it‘s simply because they are inept;
they aren‘t able to do any better; under capitalism, they hadn‘t
learned to work, or else they were simply egotists and bribe—takers.

And so, at the beginning of the reconstruction period, a sur—
prising tendency toward leniency could be observed in regard to
the engineers.

The year 1922, the first year of peace, was rich in public trials,
so rich that almost this entire chapter will be devoted to that
year alone. (People are surprised: the war has ended, and yet
there is an increase in court activity? But in 1945, too, and in
1948, the Dragon became very, very energetic. Is there not, per—
haps, a simple sort of law in this?)

1. Krylenko, Za Pyat Let, p. 381.
2. Ibid., pp. 382—383.
