The Interrogation | 97

the accused." On November 13, 1920, Dzerzhinsky reported in a
letter to the Cheka that "slanderous declarations are often given
the green light" in the Cheka.

After so many decades have they not taught us that people do
not return from there? Except for the small, brief, intentional re—
verse wave of 1939, one hears only the rarest, isolated stories of
someone being turned loose as the result of an interrogation. And
in such cases, the person was either imprisoned soon again or
else he was let out so he could be kept under surveillance. That
is how the tradition arose that the Organs do not make mistakes.
Then what about those who were innocent?

In his Dictionary of Definitions Dal makes the following dis—
tinction: "An inquiry is distinguished from an investigation by
the fact that it is carried out to determine whether there is a basis
for proceeding to an investigation."

On, sacred simplicity! The Organs have never heard of such a
thing as an inquiry! Lists of names prepared up above, or an
initial suspicion, or a denunciation by an informer, or any anony—
mous denunciation," were all that was needed to bring about the
arrest of the suspect, followed by the inevitable formal charge.
The time allotted for investigation was not used to unravel the
crime but, in ninety—five cases out of a hundred, to exhaust, wear
down, weaken, and render helpless the defendant, so that he
would want it to end at any cost.

As long ago as 1919 the chief method used by the interrogator
was a revolver on the desk. That was how they investigated not
only political but also ordinary misdemeanors and violations. At
the trial of the Main Fuels Committee (1921), the accused
Makhrovskaya complained that at her interrogation she had been
drugged with cocaine. The prosecutor replied: "If she had de—
clared that she had been treated rudely, that they had threatened
to shoot her, this might be just barely believable."* The frighten—
ing revolver lies there and sometimes it is aimed at you, and the
interrogator doesn‘t tire himself out thinking up what you are

5. Article 93 of the Code of Criminal Procedure has this to say: "An anony—
mous declaration can serve as reason for beginning a criminal case"! (And
there is no need to be surprised at the word "criminal" here, since all "politicals"
were considered criminals, too, under the Code.)

6. N. V. Krylenko, Za Pyat Let (1918—1922) (The Last Five Years [1918—
1922]), Moscow—Petrograd, GIZ, 1923, p. 401.
