338 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

The Moscow Party organization also kept its eyes on the water—
supply system. (And behind it stood the Cheka.) "In our own
time we built our army on the basis of a healthy feeling of class
enmity; in its name, we do not entrust even one responsible posi—
tion to people who do not belong to our camp, without assigning
them . . . a commissar."* And so, they all immediately began to
order the chief engineer about, to supervise him, to give him
instructions, and to shift the engineering personnel around with—
out his knowledge. ("They broke up the whole nest of business—
men.")

But they did not, even so, safeguard the water—supply system.
Things didn‘t go better with it, but worse! So slyly had that gang
of engineers contrived to carry out an evil scheme. Even more:
overcoming his intellectual‘s interim nature, as a result of which
he had never in his life expressed himself sharply, Oldenborger
made so bold as to describe as stupid stubbornness the actions
of the new chief of the water—supply system, Zenyuk (to Kry—
lenko, "a profoundly likable person on the basis of his internal
structure").

It was at this point that it became clear that "engineer Olden—
borger was consciously betraying the interests of the workers and
that he was a direct and open enemy of the dictatorship of the
working class." They started bringing inspection commissions
into the water—supply system, but the commissions found that
everything was in good order and that water was being supplied
on a normal basis. The RKI men, the "rabkrinovtsy," refused to —
be satisfied with this. They kept pouring report after report into
the RKI. Oldenborger simply wanted to "ruin, spoil, break down
the water—supply system for political purposes," but he was unable
to. Well, they put what obstacles in his way that they could;
they prevented wasteful boiler repairs and replacing the wooden
tanks with concrete ones. At meetings of the water—supply—system
workers, the leaders began saying openly that their chief engineer
was the "soul of organized technical sabotage" and that he
should not be believed, that he should be resisted at every point.

Despite all this, the operation of the water—supply system not
only didn‘t improve, but deteriorated.

What was particularly offensive to the "hereditary proletarian

6. Ibid., p. 434.
