The Interrogation | 131

A human being has a point of view!

N. Stolyarova recalls an old woman who was her neighbor on
the Butyrki bunks in 1937. They kept on interrogating her every
night. Two years earlier, a former Metropolitan of the Orthodox
Church, who had escaped from exile, had spent a night at her
home on his way through Moscow. "But he wasn‘t the former
Metropolitan, he was the Metropolitan! Truly, I was worthy of
receiving him." "All right then. To whom did he go when he
left Moscow?" "I know, but I won‘t tell you!" (The Metropolitan
had escaped to Finland via an underground railroad of believers.)
At first the interrogators took turns, and then they went after her
in groups. They shook their fists in the little old woman‘s face,
and she replied: "There is nothing you can do with me even if you
cut me into pieces. After all, you are afraid of your bosses, and
you are afraid of each other, and you are even afraid of killing
me." (They would lose contact with the underground railroad.)
"But I am not afraid of anything. I would be glad to be judged
by God right this minute."

There were such people in 1937 too, people who did not return
to their cell for their bundles of belongings, who chose death,
who signed nothing denouncing anyone.

One can‘t say that the history of the Russian revolutionaries
has given us any better examples of steadfastness. But there is
no comparison anyway, because none of our revolutionaries ever
knew what a really good interrogation could be, with fifty—two
different methods to choose from.

Sheshkovsky did not subject Radishchev to torture. And be—
cause of contemporary custom, Radishchev knew perfectly well
that his sons would serve as officers in the imperial guard no mat—
ter what happened to him, and that their lives wouldn‘t be cut
short. Nor would anyone confiscate Radishchev‘s family estate.
Nonetheless, in the course of his brief two—week interrogation,
this outstanding man renounced his beliefs and his book and
begged for mercy.

Nicholas I didn‘t have enough imagination to arrest the wives
of the Decembrists and compel them to scream in the interroga—
tion room next door, or even to torture the Decembrists them—
selves. But in any case he didn‘t need to. Even Ryleyev "answered
