166 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

clarity the world we were about to leave. At times a hostile squall
flew to the attack and tore from the black clouds a snow that was
not really even white, which beat icily on faces and backs and
feet, soaking through our overcoats and our footcloths.

Six backs ahead of me, six constant backs. There was more
than enough time to examine and re—examine the crooked, hide—
ous brands "SU" and the shiny black cloth on the German‘s back.
There was more than enough time to reconsider my former life
and to comprehend my present one. But I couldn‘t. I had been
smashed on the head with an oak club—but I still didn‘t com—
prehend.

Six backs! There was neither approval nor condemnation in
their swing.

The German soon tired. He shifted the suitcase from hand to
hand, grabbed at his heart, made signs to the convoy that he
couldn‘t carry it any further. At that point his neighbor in the
pair, a POW who only a little while before had experienced God
knows what in German captivity (but, perhaps, mercy too), took
the suitcase of his own free will and carried it.

After that the other POW‘s carried it in turn, also without
being ordered to; and then the German again.

All but me.

And no one said a word to me.

At one point we met a long string of empty carts. The drivers
studied us with interest, and some of them jumped up to full
height on top of the carts and stared. I understood very quickly
that their stares and their malice were directed toward me. I
was very sharply set off from the others: my coat was new, long,
and cut to fit my figure snugly. My tabs had not yet been torn off,
and in the filtered sunlight my buttons, also not cut off, burned
with the glitter of cheap gold. It was easy to see I was an officer,
with a look of newness, too, and newly taken into custody. Per—
haps this very fall from the heights stimulated them and gave
them pleasure, suggesting some gleam of justice, but more likely
they could not get it into their heads, stuffed with political in—
doctrination, that one of their own company commanders could
be arrested in this way, and they all decided unanimously I had
come from the other side.

"Aha, the Vlasov bastard got caught, did he! Shoot the rat!"
