The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 83

obvious from the fact that interned persons were sentenced as
severely as POW‘s. For example, during the first days of the war
one of our destroyers went aground on Swedish territory. Its crew
proceeded to live freely in Sweden during all the rest of the war,
and in such comfort and plenty as they had never experienced
before and would never experience again. The U.S.S.R. retreated,
attacked, starved and died, while those scoundrels stuffed their
neutral mugs. After the war Sweden returned them to us along
with the destroyer. Their treason to the Motherland was indubi—
table—but somehow the case didn‘t get off the ground. They let
them go their different ways and then pasted them with Anti—
Soviet Agitation for their lovely stories in praise of freedom and
good eating in capitalist Sweden. (This was the Kadenko
group.)*

 

Caspian, they were immediately put behind barbed wire. The police who
received them ripped off their military insignia and liberated them of all things
the Americans had given them (keeping them for themselves, of course, not
turning them over to the state); then they sent them off to Vorkuta to await
special orders, without (due to inexperience) sentencing them to a specific
term under any article of the Code. These "Africans" lived in Vorkuta in a
betwixt—and—between condition. They were not under guard, but they were
given no passes, and without passes they could not take so much as one step
in Vorkuta. They were paid wages at the same rate as free workers, but they
were treated like prisoners. And the special orders never did come. They were
forgotten men.

43. What happened to this group later makes an anecdote. In camp they
kept their mouths shut about Sweden, fearing they‘d get a second term. But
people in Sweden somehow found out about their fate and published slanderous
reports in the press. By that time the boys were scattered far and near among
various camps. Suddenly, on the strength of special orders, they were all
yanked out and taken to the Kresty Prison in Leningrad. There they were fed
for two months as though for slaughter and allowed to let their hair grow.
Then they were dressed with modest elegance, rehearsed on what to say and
to whom, and warned that any bastard who dared to squeak out of turn would
get a bullet in his skull—and they were led off to a press conference for selected
foreign journalists and some others who had known the entire crew in Sweden.
The former internees bore themselves cheerfully described where they were
living, studying, and working, and expressed their indignation at the bourgeois
slander they had read about not long before in the Western press (after all,
Western papers are sold in the Soviet Union at every corner newsstand!). And
so they had written to one another and decided to gather in Leningrad. (Their
travel expenses didn‘t bother them in the least.) Their fresh, shiny appearance
completely gave the lie to the newspaper canard. The discredited journalists
went off to write their apologies. It was wholly inconceivable to the Western
imagination that there could be any other explanation. And the men who had
been the subjects of the interview were taken off to a bath, had their hair
cut off again, were dressed in their former rags, and sent back to the same
camps. But because they had conducted themselves properly, none of them
was given a second term.
