The Law as a Child | 325

That summer some Soviet officials had called on Father Superior
Ion®‘ at the Zvenigorod monastery and ordered him ("Step
lively there!") to turn over to them the holy relics of St. Savva.
The officials not only smoked inside the church and evidently be—
hind the altar screen as well, and, of course, refused to take off
their caps, but one of them took Savva‘s skull in his hands and be—
gan to spit into it, to demonstrate that its sanctity was an illusion.
And there were further acts of desecration. This led to the alarm
bell being sounded, a popular uprising, and the killing of one or
two of the officials. (The others denied having committed any
acts of desecration, including the spitting incident, and Krylenko
accepted their denials.)"" Were these officials the ones on trial
now? No, the monks.

We beg the reader, throughout, to keep in mind: from 1918
on, our judicial custom determined that every Moscow trial,
except, of course, the unjust trial of the Chekists, was by no
means an isolated trial of an accidental concatenation of cir—
cumstances which had converged by accident; it was a landmark
of judicial policy; it was a display—window model whose specifi—
cations determined what product was good for the provinces too;
it was a standard; it was like that one—and—only model solution
up front in the arithmetic book for the schoolchildren to follow
for themselves.

Thus, when we say, "the trial of the churchmen," this must be
understood in the multiple plural . . . "many trials." And, in fact,
the supreme accuser himself willingly explains: "Such trials have
rolled along through almost all the tribunals of the Republic."
(What language!) They had taken place not long before in the
tribunals in North Dvina, Tver, and Ryazan; in Saratov, Kazan,
Ufa, Solvychegodsk, and Tsarevokokshaisk, trials were held of
the clergy, the choirs, and the active members of the congrega—

51. Firguf, a former guards officer of the Tsar‘s household cavalry, who
had "suddenly undergone a spiritual conversion, given all his goods to the
poor, and entered a monastery, but I do not in fact know whether he actually
did distribute his goods to the poor." Yes, and if one admits the possibility of
spiritual conversion, what then remains of class theory?

52. But which of us doesn‘t remember similar scenes? My first memory is
of an event that took place when I was, probably, three or four: The peaked—
heads (as they called the Chekists in their:high—peaked Budenny caps) invaded
a Kislovodsk church, sliced through the dumbstruck crowd—of worshipers, and,
in their pointed caps, went straight through the altar sereen to the altar and
stopped the service.
