In the Engine Room | 285

penalty was a court sentence, it could be up to twenty—five years
and include:

e Deprivation of titles, ranks, and decorations
e Confiscation of all property

e Imprisonment

e Deprivation of the right to correspond

Thus a person could disappear from the face of the earth with
the help of the OSO even more reliably than under the terms
of some primitive court sentence.

The OSO enjoyed another important advantage in that its
penalty could not be appealed. There was nowhere to appeal to.
There was no appeals jurisdiction above it, and no jurisdiction
beneath it. It was subordinate only to the Minister of Internal
Affairs, to Stalin, and to Satan.

Another big advantage the OSO had was speed. This speed
was limited only by the technology of typewriting.

And, last but not least, not only did the OSO not have to con—
front the accused face to face, which lessened the burden on inter—
prison transport: it didn‘t even have to have his photograph. At
a time when the prisons were badly overcrowded, this was a great
additional advantage because the prisoner did not have to take
up space on the prison floor, or eat free bread once his interroga—
tion had been completed. He could be sent off to camp imme—
diately and put to honest work. The copy of the sentence could be
read to him much later.

It used to be that in favorable conditions the prisoners were
unloaded from freight cars at their destinations. And they were
made to kneel down right there, next to the tracks—as a pre—
caution against attempted escape. But it looked as if they were
praying to the OSO. And then and there their sentences were
read out to them. It could also happen differently. In 1938
those who arrived at Perebory on prisoner transports did not
know either their Code articles or their sentences, but the clerk
who met them knew, and he looked them up on the list: SVE—
Socially Harmful Element—five years. That was during the time
when there was an urgent need for many hands to work on the
Moscow—Volga Canal.
