146 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

Or else it was a matter of the Progressive Doctrine, the granite
ideology. An interrogator in awful Orotukan—sent there to the
Kolyma in 1938 as a penalty assignment—was so touched when
M. Lurye, former director of the Krivoi Rog Industrial Complex,
readily agreed to sign an indictment which meant a second camp
term that he used the time they had thus saved to say: "You think
we get any satisfaction from using persuasion?" We have to do
what the Party demands of us. You are an old Party member. Tell
me what would you do in my place?" Apparently Lurye nearly
agreed with him, and it may have been the fact that he had al—
ready been thinking in some such terms that led him to sign so
readily. It is after all a convincing argument.

But most often it was merely a matter of cynicism. The blue—
caps understood: the workings of the meat grinder and loved it.
In the Dzhida camps in 1944, interrogator Mironenko said to the
condemned Babich with pride in his faultless logic: "Interrogation
and trial are merely judicial corroboration. They cannot alter your
fate, which was previously decided. If it is necessary to shoot you,
then you will be shot even if you are altogether innocent. If it is
necessary to acquit you,° then no matter how guilty you are you
will be cleared and acquitted." Kushnaryev, Chief of the First
Investigation Department of the West Kazakhstan Provincial
State Security Administration, laid it on the line in just that way to
Adolf Tsivilko. "After all, we‘re not going to let you out if you‘re
a Leningrader!" (In other words, a Communist Party member
with seniority.)

"Tust give us a person—and we‘ll create the case!" That was
what many of them said jokingly, and it was their slogan. What
we think of as torture they think of as good work. The wife of
the interrogator Nikolai Grabishchenko (the Volga Canal Proj—
ect) said touchingly to her neighbors: "Kolya is a very good
worker. One of them didn‘t confess for a long time—and they
gave him to Kolya. Kolya talked with him for one night and he
confessed."

What prompted them all to slip into harness and pursue so
zealously not truth but totals of the processed. and condemned?
Because it was most comfortable for them not to be different from
the others. And because these totals meant an easy life, supple—

2. An affectionate term for torture.
3. This evidently refers to their own people.
