The Law as a Child | 327

The People‘s Commissariat of Justice issued a directive, dated
August 25, 1920, for the liquidation of relics of all kinds, since
they were a significant obstacle to the resplendent movement
toward a new, just society.

Pursuing further Krylenko‘s own selection of cases, let us also
examine the case tried in the Verkhtrib—in other words, the
Supreme Tribunal. (How affectionately they abbreviated words
within their intimate circle, but how they roared out for us little
insects: "Rise! The court is in session!")

E. The Case of the "Tactical Center"—August 16—20, 1920

In this case there were twenty—eight defendants present, plus
additional defendants who were being tried in absentia because
they weren‘t around.

At the very beginning of his impassioned speech, in a voice
not yet grown hoarse and in phrases illumined by class analysis,
the supreme accuser informs us that in addition to the land—
owners and the capitalists "there existed and there continues to
exist one additional social stratum, the social characteristics of
which have long since been under consideration by the repre—
sentatives of revolutionary socialism. [In other words: to be or
not to be?] This stratum is the so—called ‘intelligentsia.‘ In this
trial, we shall be concerned with the judgment of history on the
activity of the Russian intelligentsia®"® and with the verdict of
the Revolution on it.

The narrow limits of our investigation prevent our compre—
hending exactly the particular manner in which the representa—
tives of revolutionary socialism were taking under consideration
the fate of the so—called intelligentsia and what specifically they
were planning for it. However, we take comfort in the fact that
these materials have been published, that they are accessible to
everyone, and that they can be assembled in any required detail.
Therefore, solely to understand the over—all atmosphere of the
Republic, we shall recall the opinion of the Chairman of the
Council of People‘s Commissars in the years when all these
tribunal sessions were going on.

55. Krylenko, op. cit., p. 34.
