240 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

interrogators. And the convicted prisoners, the entire nation, and
the newspapers repeated and reinforced this mistake, involuntarily
letting the truth out of the bag. They intended to declare them
"traitors to the Motherland." But they were universally referred
to, in speech and in writing, even in the court documents, as
"traitors of the Motherland."

You said it! They were not traitors to her. They were her
traitors. It was not they, the unfortunates, who had betrayed the
Motherland, but their calculating Motherland who had betrayed
them, and not just once but thrice.

The first time she betrayed them was on the battlefield, through
ineptitude—when the government, so beloved by the Mother—
land, did everything it could to lose the war: destroyed the lines
of fortifications; set up the whole air force for annihilation; dis—
mantled the tanks and artillery; removed the effective generals;
and forbade the armies to resist." And the war prisoners were the
men whose bodies took the blow and stopped the Wehrmacht.

The second time they were heartlessly betrayed by the Mother—
land was when she abandoned them to die in captivity.

And the third time they were unscrupulously betrayed was
when, with motherly love, she coaxed them to return home, with
such phrases as "The Motherland has forgiven you! The Mother—
land calls you!" and snared them the moment they reached the
frontiers."

It would appear that during the one thousand one hundred
years of Russia‘s existence as a state there have been, ah, how
many foul and terrible deeds! But among them was there ever so
multimillioned foul a deed as this: to betray one‘s own soldiers
and proclaim them traitors?

How easily we left them out of our own accounting! He was
a traitor? For shame! Write him off! And our Father wrote them
off, even before we did: he threw the flower of Moscow‘s in—
telligentsia into the Vyazma meat grinder with Berdan single—

2. Now, after twenty—seven years, the first honest work on this subject has
appeared—P. G. Grigorenko, "A Letter to the Magazine Problems of the His—
tory of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union," samizdat, 1968—and such
works are going to multiply from here on out. Not all the witnesses died. And
soon no one will call Stalin‘s government anything but a government of insanity
and treason.

3. One of the biggest war criminals, Colonel General Golikov, former chief
of the Red Army‘s intelligence administration, was put in charge of coaxing the
repatriates home and swallowing them up.
