The Ports of the Archipelago | 547

begin a new life in camp. It was not yet packed full. The aisle
was free. There was plenty of space under the bunks. According
to the traditional arrangement, the thieves occupied the second
tier of bunks: their senior members were beside the windows, their
juniors farther back. A neutral gray mass was on the lower bunks.
No one attacked us. Without looking around and without thinking
ahead, inexperienced as we were, we sat down on the asphalt
floor and crawled under the bunks. We would even be cozy there.
The bunks were low for big men to get under, and we had to
slide in on our bellies, inching along the asphalt floor. We did.
And we were going to lie there quietly and talk quietly. Not a
chance! In the semidarkness, with a wordless rustling, from all
sides jfuveniles crept up on us on all fours, like big rats. They
were still boys, some twelve—year—olds even, but the Criminal Code
accepted them too. They had already been processed through a
thieves‘ trial, and they were continuing their apprenticeship with
the thieves here. They had been unleashed on us. They jumped
us from all sides and six pairs of hands stripped from us and
wrenched from under us all our wealth. And all this took place in
total silence, with only the sound of sinister sniffing. And we were
trapped: we couldn‘t get up, we couldn‘t move. It took no more
than a minute for them to seize the bundles with the fat bacon,
sugar, and bread. They were gone. We lay there feeling stupid.
We had given up our food without a fight. And we could go on
lying there now, but that was utterly impossible. Creeping out
awkwardly, rear ends first, we got up from under the bunks.

Am I a coward? I had thought I wasn‘t one. I had pushed my
way into the heat of a bombing in the open steppe, I hadn‘t been
afraid to drive over a trail obviously mined with antitank mines.
I had remained coolheaded when I led my battery out of encircle—
ment and went back in for a damaged command car. Why, then,
at that moment didn‘t I grab one of those human rats and grate
his rosy face on the black asphalt? Was he too small? Well then,
go for their leaders. But no. At the front we are strengthened
by some kind of supplementary awareness (and quite false, too,
perhaps): is it a sense of our military unity? The sense of being
in the right place at the right time? Of duty? But in this new situ—
ation nothing is clear, there are no rules, and everything has to be
learned by feel.
