The Law Matures | 417

through with it too. Then a Plenum of the Central Committee
was convened with the following agenda: (1) the crimes of the
Rightist Center; (2) the anti—Party conduct of Comrade Bu—
kharin, as evidenced by his hunger strike.

Bukharin hesitated. Had he perhaps really insulted the Party
in some particular way? Unshaven, thin, wan, already a prisoner
in appearance, he dragged himself along to the Plenum. "What on
earth were you thinking of?" Dear Koba asked him cordially. "But
what was I to do in the face of such accusations? They want to
expel me from the Party." Stalin made a wry face at the absurdity:
"Come on, now. No one is going to expel you from the Party!"

Bukharin believed him and revived. He willingly assured the
Plenum of his repentance, and immediately abandoned his hunger
strike. (At home he said: "Come on now, cut me some sausage!
Koba said they wouldn‘t expel me.") But in the course of the
Plenum, Kaganovich and Molotov (impudent fellows they were,
indeed!—paid no attention to Stalin‘s opinion!)" both called
Bukharin a Fascist hireling and demanded that he be shot.

And once again Bukharin‘s spirits fell, and in his last days he
began to compose his "Letter to the Future Central Committee."
Committed to memory and thereby preserved, it recently became
known to the whole world. However, it did not shake the world
to its foundations."" For what were the last words this brilliant
theoretician decided to hand down to future generations? Just
one more cry of anguish and a plea to be restored to the Party.
(He paid dearly in shame for that devotion!) And one more
affirmation that he "fully approved" everything that had hap—
pened up to and including 1937. And that included not only all
the previous jeeringly mocking trials, but also all the foul—smelling
waves of our great prison sewage disposal system.

And that is how he himself certified that he, too, deserved to
plunge into those waves.

So, at long last, he had matured to the point of being turned
over to the prompters and the assistant producers—this muscular
man, this hunter and wrestler! (In playful tussles in the presence
of the Central Committee, how many times had he landed Stalin

37. See what a wealth of information we are deprived of because we‘re
protecting Molotov‘s noble old age.
38. Nor did it shake the "Future Central Committee" either.
