300 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

bold legality. Their detailed history will someday be written by
someone, and it‘s not for us even to attempt to include it in our
present investigation.

However, we cannot do without a brief review. It is our duty,
anyway, to probe some of the charred ruins which go all the way
back to that gentle, misty, rose—colored dawn.

In those dynamic years, the sabers of war were not rusting
in their scabbards, nor did the executioners‘ revolvers have time
to grow cold in their holsters. Only later on did the custom de—
velop of hiding executions in cellars under cover of night and of
shooting the victims in the back of the head. In 1918, the famous
Ryazan Chekist Stelmakh had those sentenced to death shot in
the courtyard, during the day, so that prisoners awaiting execu—
tion could watch from the prison windows.

There was an official term current then: extrajudicial reprisal
. . . not because there weren‘t any courts at the time, but because
there was the Cheka.‘ Because it was more efficient. Certainly,
there were courts, and they tried and convicted and executed
people, but we need to remember that, parallel to them and inde—
pendently of them, extrajudicial reprisal went on at the same
time. How can one depict its scale? M. Latsis, in his popular
review of the Cheka‘s activity," gives us material for only a year
and a half (1918 and half of 1919) and for only twenty provinces
of Central Russia ("The figures presented here are far from com—
plete,"" in part, perhaps, out of modesty): those shot by the
Cheka (i.e., without trial, bypassing the courts) numbered 8,389
persons (eight thousand three hundred and eighty—nine);* coun—
terrevolutionary organizations uncovered—412 (a fantastic fig—
ure, in view of our inadequate capacity for organization
throughout our history and also the general isolation of indi—
viduals in those years and the general psychological depression) ;
the total of those arrested—87,000° (and this figure smells of
understatement).

1. This fledgling whose beak had not yet hardened was warmed and encour—
aged by Trotsky: "Terror is a powerful means of policy and one would have to
be a hypocrite not to understand this." And Zinoviev rejoiced too, not yet fore—
seeing his own end: "The letters GPU, like the letters VChK, are the most
popular in the world."

2. Latsis, Dva Goda Borby na Vnutrennom Fronte.

3. Ibid., p. 74.

4. Ibid., p. 75.

5. Ibid., p. 76.
