The Law Becomes a Man | 341

Sedelnikov and the RKI men were "easily brushed off" by the
tribunal. And the defendant Sedelnikov replied brazenly to the
threats of the accuser. "Comrade Krylenko! I know all those
articles. But after all, no one is judging class enemies here, and
those articles relate to class enemies."

However, Krylenko laid it on good and thick. Deliberately
false denunciations to state institutions . . . in circumstances
aggravating guilt, such as a personal grudge and the settling of
personal accounts . . . the abuse of an official position . . . political
irresponsibility . . . abuse of power and of the authority of govern—
ment officials and members of the Russian Communist Party
(Bolsheviks) . . . disorganization of the work of the water—
supply system . . . injury done the Moscow Soviet and Soviet
Russia, because there were few such specialists, and it was im—
possible to find replacements for them. "And we won‘t even
begin to speak of the individual, personal loss. . . . In our time,
when struggle is the chief content of our lives, we have somehow
grown used to not counting these irrevocable losses."" The
Supreme Revolutionary Tribunal must utter its weighty word:
"Punishment must be assessed with all due severity! . . . We
didn‘t come here just to crack jokes."

Good Lord, now what are they going to get? Could it really
be? My reader has gotten used to prompting: all of them to be
sh 1

And that is absolutely correct. All of them were to be
publicly shamed—bearing in mind their sincere repentance! All
of them to be sentenced to—ostracism and ridicule.

Two truths . ..

And Sedelnikov, allegedly, got one year in jail.

You will just have to forgive me if I don‘t believe it.

 

Oh, you bards of the twenties, painting your pictures of their
bright and bubbling happiness! Even those who touched only their
farthest edge, who touched them only in childhood, will never
forget them. And those plug—uglies, those fat faces, busy per—
secuting engineers—in the twenties, too, they ate their bellies full.

And now we see also that they had been busy from 1918 on.

9. Ibid., p. 458.
