362 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

there had been an attempt to blow up Trotsky‘s train—and there—
fore the SR Central Committee was guilty of terrorism. And
further: Donskoi, a member of the Central Committee, warned
Fanya Kaplan that she would be expelled from the Party if she
fired at Lenin. But that wasn‘t enough! Why hadn‘t she been
categorically forbidden to? (Or perhaps: why hadn‘t she been
denounced to the Cheka?)

It was feathers of this sort that Krylenko kept plucking from
the dead rooster—that the SR‘s had not taken measures to stop
individual terrorist acts by their unemployed and languishing
gunmen. That was the whole of their terrorism. ((Y¥es, and those
gunmen of theirs didn‘t do anything either. In 1922, two of them,
Konopleva and Semyonov, with suspicious eagerness, enriched
the GPU and the tribunal with their voluntary evidence, but their
evidence couldn‘t be pinned on the SR Central Committee—and
suddenly and inexplicably these inveterate terrorists were re—
leased scot—free.)

All the evidence was such that it had to be bolstered up with
props. Krylenko explained things this way in regard to one of
the witnesses: "If this person had really wanted to make things
up, it is unlikely he would have done so in such a way as to hit
the target merely by accident.""* (Strongly put, indeed! This
could be said about any piece of fabricated testimony whatever.)
Or else, about Donskoi: Could one really "suspect him of possess—
ing the special insight to testify to what the prosecution wanted"?
It was just the other way around with Konopleva: the reliability
of her testimony was evidenced by the fact that she had not
testified to everything the prosecution needed. (But enough for
the defendants to be shot.) "If we ask whether Konopleva con—
cocted all this, then it is . . . clear: if one is going to concoct, one
must really concoct [He should know!], and if one is going to
expose someone, one should really expose him.""" But she, you
see, did not carry it through to the end. Then things are put still
another way: "After all, it is unlikely that Yefimov needed to put
Konopleva in danger of execution without cause.""" Once more
correct, once more strongly put! Or, even more strongly: "Could
this encounter have taken place? Such a possibility is not ex—

26. Krylenko, op. cit., p. 251.
27. Ibid., p. 253.
28. Ibid., p. 258.
