408 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

approximately 1934, violations of Leninist norms of legality
began." And how are we to enter this abyss of illegality now?
How are we to drag our way along yet another bitter stretch of
the road?

However, these trials which follow were, because of the fame
of the defendants, a cynosure for the whole world. They did not
escape the attention of the public. They were written about. They
were interpreted and they will be interpreted again and again.
It is for us merely to touch lightly on their riddle.

Let us make one qualification, though not a big one; the
published stenographic records did not coincide completely with
what was said at the trials. One writer who received an entrance
pass—they were given out only to selected individuals—took
running notes and subsequently discovered these differences. All
the correspondents also noted the snag with Krestinsky, which
made a recess necessary in order to get him back on the track of
his assigned testimony. (Here is how I picture it. Before the trial
a chart was set up for emergencies: in the first column was the
name of the defendant; in the second, the method to be used
during the recess if he should depart from his text during the
open trial; in the third column, the name of the Chekist respon—
sible for applying the indicated method. So if Krestinsky de—
parted from his text, then who would come on the run and what
that person would do had already been arranged.)

But the inaccuracies of the stenographic record do not change
or lighten the picture. Dumfounded, the world watched three
plays in a row, three wide—ranging and expensive dramatic pro—
ductions in which the powerful leaders of the fearless Communist
Party, who had turned the entire world upside down and terrified
it, now marched forth like doleful, obedient goats and bleated
out everything they had been ordered to, vomited all over them—
selves, cringingly abased themselves and their convictions, and
confessed to crimes they could not in any wise have committed.

This was unprecedented in remembered history. It was par—
ticularly astonishing in contrast with the recent Leipzig trial of
Dimitrov. Dimitrov had answered the Nazi judges like a roaring
lion, and, immediately afterward, his comrades in Moscow, mem—
bers of that same unyielding cohort which had made the whole
world tremble—and the greatest of them at that, those who had
