That Spring | 257

all, is almost a symbol of the Archipelago. It ought to be on the
jacket of this book.

The Vlasov men had a presentiment of all this; they knew it
ahead of time; nevertheless, on the left sleeve of their German
uniforms they sewed the shield with the white—blue—red edging,
the field of St. Andrew, and the letters "ROA."*° The inhabitants

10. These letters became even better known, although, as before, there was
still no real Russian Liberation Army. The units were all scattered and kept
subordinate to German orders, and the Vlasov generals had nothing to do but
play cards in Dahlemdorf, near Berlin. By the middle of 1942, Voskoboinikov‘s
brigade, which, after his death, was commanded by Kaminsky, numbered five
infantry regiments of 2,500 to 3,000 men each, with attached artillery crews,
a tank battalion consisting of two dozen Soviet tanks, and an artillery battalion
with three dozen guns. The commanding officers were POW officers, and the
rank and file was made up, in considerable part, of local Bryansk volunteers.
This brigade was under orders to guard the area against partisans. In the sum—
mer of 1942, the brigade of Gil—Blazhevich was transferred for the same
purpose from Poland, where it had been notable for its cruelty toward Poles
and Jews, to the area near Mogilev. At the beginning of 1943, its command
refused to acknowledge Vlasov‘s authority, demanding that he explain why,
in his stated program, there was no reference to the "struggle against world
Jewry and Jew—loving commissars." These were the very men—called the
Rodionovites, because Gil had changed his name to Rodionov—who in August,
1943, when Hitler‘s approaching defeat became apparent, changed their black
flag with a silver skull to a red flag, and proclaimed Soviet authority and a large
"partisan region" in the northeast corner of Byelorussia.

At that time, Soviet newspapers began to write about the "partisan region,"
but without explaining its origins. Later on, all surviving Rodionovites were
imprisoned. And whom did the Germans immediately throw in against the
Rodionovites? The Kaminsky brigade! That was in May, 1944, and they also
threw in thirteen of their own divisions in an effort to liquidate the "partisan
region." That was the extent to which Germans understood all those
tricolor cockades, St. George, and the field of St. Andrew. The Russian and
German languages were mutually untranslatable, inexpressible, uncorrelatable.
Still worse: in October, 1944, the Germans threw in Kaminsky‘s brigade—
with its Moslem units—to suppress the Warsaw uprising. While one group of
Russians sat traitorously dozing beyond the Vistula, watching the death of
Warsaw through their binoculars, other Russians crushed the uprising! Hadn‘t
the Poles had enough Russian villainy to bear in the nineteenth century with—
out having to endure more of it in the twentieth? For that matter, was that the
last of it? Perhaps more is still to come. The career of the Osintorf Battalion
was apparently more straightforward. This consisted of about six hundred
soldiers and two hundred officers, with an émigré command, I. K. Sakharov
and Lamsdorf, Russian uniforms, and a white—blue—red flag; it was thrown in
near Pskov. Then, reinforced to regimental strength, it was readied for a para—
chute drop on the line of Vologda—Archangel, the idea being to make use of
the nest of concentration camps in that area. Throughout 1943, Igor Sakharov
managed to prevent his unit from being sent against the partisans. But then
he was replaced and the battalion was first disarmed and imprisoned in a camp
and then sent off to the Western Front. Then, in the fall of 1943, the Germans
decided to send the Russian cannon fodder to the Atlantic Wall, and against
the French and Italian Resistance, having lost, forgotten, and not even tried
to recall its original purpose. Those among the Vlasov men who had managed
to retain some kind of political rationality or hope thereupon lost both.
