The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 51

Then in February, 1932, again in Leningrad, many churches
were closed simultaneously, while, at the same time, large—scale
arrests were made among the clergy. And there are still more
dates and places, but they haven‘t been reported to us by any—
one.)

e Non—Orthodox sects were also under constant attack, even
those sympathetic to Communism. (Thus, in 1929, they arrested
every last member of the communes between Sochi and Khosta.
These communes ran everything—both production and distribu—
tion—on a Communist basis, and it was all done fairly and
honestly, in a way the rest of the country won‘t achieve in a hun—
dred years. But, alas, they were too literate; they were well read
in religious literature; and atheism was not their philosophy,
which combined Baptist and Tolstoyan beliefs with those of Yoga.
It appeared that such a commune was criminal and that it could
not bring people happiness.)

In the twenties, a large group of Tolstoyans was exiled to the
foothills of the Altai and there they established communal settle—
ments jointly with the Baptists When the construction of the
Kuznetsk industrial complex began, they supplied it with food
products. Then arrests began—first the teachers (they were not
teaching in accordance with the government programs), and
the children ran after the cars, shouting. And after that the com—
mune leaders were taken.

e The Big Solitaire game played with the socialists went on and
on uninterruptedly—of course.

e In 1929, also, those historians who had not been sent abroad
in time were arrested: Platonov, Tarle, Lyubavsky, Gotye, Li—
khachev, Izmailov, and the outstanding literary scholar M. M.
Bakhtin.

e From one end of the country to the other, nationalities kept
pouring in. The Yakuts were imprisoned after the revolt of 1928.
The Buryat—Mongols were imprisoned after the uprising of 1929
—and they say about 35,000 were shot, a figure it has been im—
possible to verify. The Kazakhs were imprisoned after Budenny‘s
cavalry heroically crushed their revolt in 1930 and 1931. The
Union for Liberation of the Ukraine was put on trial at the be—
ginning of 1930 (Professor Yefremov, Chekhovsky, Nikovsky,
etc.), and, knowing the ratio in our country of what is public to
