530 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

Osoaviakhim—the Society for Assistance to Defense and to
Aviation—Chemical Construction of the U.S.S.R.—recounted in
a Butyrki cell how the thieves in a Moscow Black Maria, on
March 8, International Women‘s Day, during their transit from
the City Court to Taganka Prison, gang—raped a young bride
in his presence (and amid the silent passivity of everyone else in
the van). That very morning the girl had come to her trial a free
person, as attractively dressed as she could manage (she was
on trial for leaving her work without official permission—which
in itself was a repulsive fabrication worked up by her chief in
revenge for her refusal to live with him). A half—hour before the
Black Maria, the girl had been sentenced to five years under
the decree and had then been shoved into this Black Maria, and
right there in broad daylight, somewhere on the Park Ring
("Drink Soviet Champagne!"), had been turned into a camp
prostitute. And are we really to say that it was the thieves who
did this to her and not the jailers? And not her chief?

And thief tenderness too! Having raped her, they robbed her.
They took the fashionable shoes with which she had hoped to
charm the judges, and her blouse—which they shoved through to
the convoy guards, who stopped the van and went off to get some
vodka and handed it in so the thieves could drink at her expense
too.

And when they got to the Taganka Prison, the girl sobbed out
her complaint. And the officer listened to her, yawned, and said:
"The government can‘t provide each of you with individual
transportation. We don‘t have such facilities."

Yes, the Black Marias are a "bottleneck" of the Archipelago.
If there is no possibility of separating the politicals from the
criminals in the Stolypins, then it isn‘t possible to keep women
separate from men in the Black Marias. And just how could one
expect the thieves not to live it up en route from one jail to
another?

Well, and if it weren‘t for the thieves, we would have to be
grateful to the Black Marias for our brief encounters with
women! Where, if not here, is one to see them, hear them, and
touch them in a prison existence?

Once in 1950 they were transporting us from the Butyrki to
the station in a not at all crowded van—fourteen people in a
