346 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

very likely, that!) In a burst of good feeling, everyone stood up.
The Metropolitan said: "The heaviest burden is division and
enmity. But the time will come when the Russian people will
unite. I myself, at the head of the worshipers, will remove the
cover {of precious metals and precious stones] from the ikon of
the Holy Virgin of Kazan. I will shed sweet tears on it and give
it away." He gave his blessing to the Bolshevik members of
Pomgol and they saw him to the door with bared heads. The
newspaper Petrogradskaya Pravda, in its issues of March 8, 9,
and 10,"* confirmed the peaceful, successful outcome of the talks,
and spoke favorably of the Metropolitan. "In Smolny they agreed
that the church vessels and ikon coverings would be melted down
into ingots in the presence of the believers."

Again things were getting fouled up with some kind of com—
promise! The noxious fumes of Christianity were poisoning the
revolutionary will. That kind of unity and that way of handing
over the valuables were not what the starving people of the Volga
needed! The spineless membership of the Petrograd Pomgol was
changed. The newspapers began to howl about the "evil pastors"
and "princes of the church," and the representatives of the church
were told: "We don‘t need your donations! And there won‘t be
any negotiations with you! Everything belongs to the government
—and the government will take whatever it considers necessary."

And so forcible requisitions, accompanied by strife, began in
Petrograd, as they did everywhere else.

And this provided the legal basis for initiating trials of the
clergy."

H. The Moscow Church Trial—April 26—May 7, 1922

This took place in the Polytechnic Museum. The court was the
Moscow Revtribunal, under Presiding Judge Bek; the prosecutors
were Lunin and Longinov. There were seventeen defendants,
including archpriests and laymen, accused of disseminating the
Patriarch‘s proclamation. This charge was more important than

12. See the articles entitled "Tserkov i Golod" ("The Church and the
Famine") and "Kak budut izyaty tserkovnye tsennosti" ("How the Church
Valuables Will Be Requisitioned").

13. I have taken this material from Ocherki po Istorii Tserkovnoi Smuty
(Essays on the History of the Troubles of the Church)}, by Anatoly Levitin,
Part I, samizdat, 1962, and from the stenographic notes on the questioning of
Patriarch Tikhon, Trial Record, Vol. V.
