That Spring | 243

All the Western peoples behaved the same in our war: parcels,
letters, all kinds of assistance flowed freely through the neutral
countries. The Western POW‘s did not have to lower themselves
to accept ladlefuls from German soup kettles. They talked back
to the German guards. Western governments gave their captured
soldiers their seniority rights, their regular promotions, even
their pay.

The only soldier in the world who cannot surrender is the
soldier of the world‘s one and only Red Army. That‘s what it says
in our military statutes. (The Germans would shout at us from
their trenches: "Ivan plen nicht!‘""—‘"Ivan no prisoner!") Who
can picture all that means? There is war; there is death—but
there is no surrender! What a discovery! What it means is: Go
and die; we will go on living. And if you lose your legs, yet man—
age to return from captivity on crutches, we will convict you.
(The Leningrader Ivanov, commander of a machine—gun platoon
in the Finnish War, was subsequently thus imprisoned in Ustvym—
lag, for example.)

Our soldiers alone, renounced by their Motherland and de—
graded to nothing in the eyes of enemies and allies, had to push
their way to the swine swill being doled out in the backyards of
the Third Reich. Our soldiers alone had the doors shut tight to
keep them from returning to their homes, although their young
souls tried hard not to believe this. There was something called
Article 58—1b—and, in wartime, it provided only for execution
by shooting! For not wanting to die from a German bullet, the
prisoner had to die from a Soviet bullet for having been a prisoner
of war! Some get theirs from the enemy; we get it from our own!

Incidentally, it is very naive to say What for? At no time have
governments been moralists. They never imprisoned people and
executed them for having done something. They imprisoned and
executed them to keep them from doing something. They im—
prisoned all those POW‘s, of course, not for treason to the Mother—
land, because it was absolutely clear even to a fool that only the
Vlasov men could be accused of treason. They imprisoned all
of them to keep them from telling their fellow villagers about
Europe. What the eye doesn‘t see, the heart doesn‘t grieve for.

What, then, were the courses of action open to Russian war
prisoners? There was only one legally acceptable coutrse: to lie
