The Interrogation | 95

free only a little while before, who was sometimes proud and
always unprepared, was to be bent and pushed through a narrow
pipe where his sides would be torn by iron hooks and where he
could not breathe, so that he would finally pray to get to the
other end. And at the other end, he would be shoved out, an
already processed native of the Archipelago, already in the
promised land. (The fool would keep on resisting! He even
thought there was a way back out of the pipe.)

The more time that passes without anything being written
about all this, the harder it becomes to assemble the scattered
testimony of the survivors. But they tell us that the creation of
fabricated cases began back in the early years of the Organs so
their constant salutary activity might be perceived as essential.
Otherwise, what with a decline in the number of enemies, the
Organs might, in a bad hour, have been forced to wither away.
As the case of Kosyrevy makes clear," the situation of the Cheka
was shaky even at the beginning of 1919. Reading the newspapers
of 1918, I ran into the official report of a terrible plot that had
just been discovered: A group of ten people wanted to (it seems
they only wanted to!) drag cannon onto the roof of an orphanage
(let‘s see—how high was it?) and shell the Kremlin. There were
ten of them (including, perhaps, women and youngsters), and
it was not reported how many cannon there were to be—nor
where the cannon were to come from. Nor what caliber they were.
Nor how they were to be carried up the stairs to the attic. Nor
how they were to be set up, on the steeply sloping roof, and so
they wouldn‘t recoil when fired! How was it that the Petersburg
police, when they were fighting to put down the February Revo—
lution, took nothing heavier than a machine gun up to the roofs?
Yet this fantasy, exceeding even the fabrications of 1937, was
read and believed! Apparently, it will be proved to us in time
that the Gumilyev case of 1921 was also fabricated.*

In that same year, 1921, the Ryazan Cheka fabricated a false
case of a "plot" on the part of the local intelligentsia. But the
protests of courageous people could still reach Moscow, and
they dropped the case. That year, too, the whole Sapropelite Com—

3. Cf. Part I, Chapter 8, below.
4. A. A. Akhmatova told me she was convinced that this was so. She even
gave me the name of the Chekist who cooked up the case—Y. Agranov, it seems.
