In the Engine Room | 287

Their primary and principal distinguishing feature was closed
doors. They were first of all closed courts—for their own con—
venience.

And by now we have become so accustomed to the fact that
millions and millions of people were tried in closed sessions and
have become used to this for so long that now and then some
mixed—up son, brother, or nephew of a prisoner will even snort at
you with conviction: "And what would you have wanted? . . .
There‘s information here. Our enemies will find out! You can‘t
do it!"

Thus the fear that our "enemies will find out" makes us clamp
our head between our own knees. Who in our Fatherland, except
some bookworms, remembers now that Karakozov, who fired at
the Tsar, was provided with a defense lawyer? Or that Zhelyabov
and all the Narodnaya Volya group were tried in public, without
any fear that the "Turks would find out"? Or that Vera Zasulich,
who attempted to kill the official who was, translated into Soviet
terms, the Chief of the Moscow Administration of the MVD—
although she missed, and the bullet went past his head—not only
was not destroyed in a torture chamber but was acquitted in
open court by a jury—no Troika—and then went off in triumph
in a carriage?

Despite these comparisons, I do not at all mean to say that a
perfect system of courts and justice ever existed in Russia. In all
probability, an excellent judicial system is the last fruit of the most
mature society, or else one needs a Solomon. Vladimir Dal notes
that in the period before the emancipation of the serfs Russia had
"not one single proverb containing any praise of the courts." And
that really means something. It seems likely that they never had
time to get around to making up a proverb praising the zemstvo
chiefs either. But, nevertheless, the judicial reform of 1864 at
least set the urban sector of our society on the road toward those
English models which Herzen praised so highly.

Saying all this, I still have not forgotten what Dostoyevsky had
to say in his Diary of a Writer against our trials by jury: about the
excesses of some lawyers‘ eloquence ("Gentlemen of the jury!
What kind of woman would she have been if she had not stabbed
her rival? Gentlemen of the jury! Who among you would not have
thrown the child out of the window?") ; and the risk that a juror‘s
momentary impulse might outweigh his civic responsibility. But
