352 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

had ended. (It was as though they had processed them in order
to shoot them at the same time as the SR‘s.) And after that,
VTsIK, the All—Russian Central Executive Committee, pardoned
six of them. And four of them—the Metropolitan Veniamin; the
Archimandrite Sergius, a former member of the State Duma;
Professor of Law Y. P. Novitsky; and the barrister Kovsharov—
were shot on the night of August 12—13.

We insistently urge our readers not to forget the principle of
provincial multiplicity. Where two church trials were held in
Moscow and Petrograd, there were twenty—two in the provinces.

They were in a big hurry to produce a Criminal Code in time for
the trial of the SR‘s—the Socialist Revolutionaries. The time had
come to set in place the granite foundation stones of the Law.
On May 12, as had been agreed, the session of VTsIK convened,
but the projected Code had not yet been completed. It had only
just been delivered for analysis to Vladimir Ilyich Lenin at his
Gorki estate outside Moscow. Six articles of the Code provided
for execution by shooting as the maximum punishment. This was
unsatisfactory. On May 15, on the margins of the draft Code,
Lenin added six more articles requiring execution by shooting
(including—under Article 69—propaganda and agitation, par—
ticularly in the form of an appeal for passive resistance to the
government and mass rejection of the obligations of military
service or tax payments).‘* And one other crime that called for
execution by shooting: unauthorized return from abroad (my,
how the socialists all used to bob back and forth incessantly!).
And there was one punishment that was the equivalent of execu—
tion by shooting: exile abroad. Vladimir Ilyich foresaw a time
not far distant when there would be a constant rush of people
to the Soviet Union from Europe, and it would be impossible to
get anyone voluntarily to leave the Soviet Union for the West.
Lenin went on to express his principal conclusion to the People‘s
Commissar of Justice:

14. In other words, like the Vyborg appeal, for which the Tsar‘s government
had imposed sentences of three months‘ imprisonment.
