The Ships of the Archipelago | 515

embankment. Perhaps it will lie there until it rains, until it snows,
until it disintegrates, but perhaps a human hand will pick it up.
And if this person isn‘t a stickler for the Party line, he will make
the address legible, he will straighten out the letters, or perhaps
put it in an envelope, and perhaps the letter will even reach its
destination. Sometimes such letters do arrive—postage due, half—
blurred, washed out, crumpled, but carrying a clearly defined
splash of grief.

But it is better still to stop as soon as possible being a sucker—
that ridiculous greenhorn, that prey, that victim. The chances
are ninety—five out of a hundred that your letter won‘t get there.
But even if it does, it will bring no happiness to your home. And
you won‘t be measuring your life and breath by hours and days
once you have entered this epic country: arrivals and departures
here are separated by decades, by a quarter—century. You will
never return to your former world. And the sooner you get used
to being without your near and dear ones, and the sooner they
get used to being without you, the better it will be. And the
easier!

And keep as few things as possible, so that you don‘t have to
fear for them. Don‘t take a suitcase for the convoy guard to crush
at the door of the car (when there are twenty—five people in a
compartment, what else could he figure out to do with it?). And
don‘t wear new boots, and don‘t wear fashionable oxfords, and
don‘t wear a woolen suit: these things are going to be stolen, taken
away, swept aside, or switched, either in the Stolypin car, or in
the Black Maria, or in the transit prison. Give them up without
a struggle—because otherwise the humiliation will poison your
heart. They will take them away from you in a fight, and trying
to hold onto your property will only leave you with a bloodied
mouth. All those brazen snouts, those jeering manners, those two—
legged dregs, are repulsive to you. But by owning things and
trembling about their fate aren‘t you forfeiting the rare oppor—
tunity of observing and understanding? And do you think that the
freebooters, the pirates, the great privateers, painted in such lively
colors by Kipling and Gumilyev, were not simply these same
