The Law Becomes a Man | 355

If my readers and I were not already sufficiently informed to
know that what was important in every trial was not the charges
brought nor guilt, so called, but expediency, we would perhaps
not be prepared to accept this trial wholeheartedly. But expedi—
ency works without fail: the SR‘s, as opposed to the Mensheviks,
were considered still dangerous, not yet dispersed and broken up,
not yet finished off. And on behalf of the fortress of the newly
created dictatorship (the proletariat), it was expedient to finish
them off.

Someone unfamiliar with this principle might mistakenly view
the entire trial as an act of Party vengeance.

Involuntarily one ponders the charges set forth in this trial,
placing them in the perspective of the long—drawn—out and still
unfolding history of nations. With the exception of a very limited
number of parliamentary democracies, during a very limited
number of decades, the history of nations is entirely a history of
revolutions and seizures of power. And whoever succeeds in
making a more successful and more enduring revolution is from
that moment on graced with the bright robes of Justice, and his
every past and future step is legalized and memorialized in odes,
whereas every past and future step of his unsuccessful enemies is
criminal and subject to arraignment and a legal penalty.

The Criminal Code had been adopted only one week earlier,
but five whole years of postrevolutionary experience had been
compressed into it. Twenty, ten, and five years earlier, the SR‘s
had been the party next door in the effort to overthrow Tsarism,
the party which had chiefly taken upon itself, thanks to the
particular character of its terrorist tactics, the burden of hard—
labor imprisonment, which had scarcely touched the Bolsheviks.

Now the first charge against them was that the SR‘s had in—
itiated the Civil War! Yes, they began it, they had begun it. They
were accused of armed resistance to the October seizure of power.
When the Provisional Government, which they supported and
which was in part made up of their members, was lawfully swept
out of office by the machine—gun fire of the sailors, the SR‘s tried
altogether illegally to defend it,"" and even returned shot for shot,

18. The fact that their efforts in defending it were very feeble, that they
were beset by hesitations, and that they renounced it right away is another
matter. For all that, their guilt was no less.
