The Law Becomes a Man | 363

cluded." Not excluded? That means it did take place. Off to the
races!

Then, too, the "subversive group." They talked about this for a
long time, and then suddenly: "Dissolved for lack of activity."
So what was all the fuss about? There had been several expropria—
tions of money from Soviet institutions (the SR‘s had nothing
with which to work, to rent apartments, to move from city to
city). But previously these had been the lovely, noble "exes"—
as all the revolutionists called them. And now, in a Soviet court?
They were "robbery and concealment of stolen goods."

Through the material adduced by the prosecution in this trial,
the dull, unblinking, yellow streetlamps of the Law throw light
on the whole uncertain, wavering, deluded history of this patheti—
cally garrulous, essentially lost, helpless, and even inactive party
which never was worthily led. And its every decision or lack of
decision, its every casting about, upsurge, or retreat, was trans—
formed into and regarded as total guilt . . . guilt and more guilt.

And if in September, 1921, ten months before the trial, the SR
Central Committee, already sitting in the Butyrki, had written
to the newly elected Central Committee that it did not agree to the
overthrow of the Bolshevik dictatorship by any available means,
but only through rallying the working masses and the dissemina—
tion of propaganda—all of which meant that, even as they
languished in prison, they did not agree to being liberated through
either terrorism or conspiracy—then that, too, was converted into
their primary guilt: Aha! so that means that you did agree to its
overthrow.

And what if they were, nevertheless, not guilty of overthrowing
the government, and not guilty of terrorism, and if there had
been hardly any "expropriations" at all, and if they had long
since been forgiven for all the rest? Our favorite prosecutor
pulled out his canonical weapon of last resort: "Ultimately, failure
to denounce is a category of crime applying to all the defendants
without exception, and it must be considered as having been
proved.""*

The Socialist Revolutionary Party was guilty of not having
squealed on itself! Now there‘s something that couldn‘t miss! This
represented a discovery that juridical thought had made in the
new Code. It was a paved highway along which they would keep

29. Ibid., p. 305.
