18 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

me, too few! Here my cry would be heard by 200 or twice 200,
but what about the 200 million? Vaguely, unclearly, I had a
vision that someday I would cry out to the 200 million.
But for the time being I did not open my mouth, and the
escalator dragged me implacably down into the nether world.
And when I got to Okhotny Ryad, I continued to keep silent.
Nor did I utter a cry at the Metropole Hotel.
Nor wave my arms on the Golgotha of Lubyanka Square.

Mine was, probably, the easiest imaginable kind of arrest. It did
not tear me from the embrace of kith and kin, nor wrench me
from a deeply cherished home life. One pallid European February
it took me from our narrow salient on the Baltic Sea, where, de—
pending on one‘s point of view, either we had surrounded the
Germans or they had surrounded us, and it deprived me only of
my familiar artillery battery and the scenes of the last three
months of the war.

The brigade commander called me to his headquarters and
asked me for my pistol; I turned it over without suspecting any
evil intent, when suddenly, from a tense, immobile suite of staff
officers in the corner, two counterintelligence officers stepped for—
ward hurriedly, crossed the room in a few quick bounds, their
four hands grabbed simultaneously at the star on my cap, my
shoulder boards, my officer‘s belt, my map case, and they shouted
theatrically:

"You are under arrest!"

Burning and prickling from head to toe, all I could exclaim
was:

"Me? What for?"

And even though there is usually no answer to this question,
surprisingly I received one! This is worth recalling, because it is
so contrary to our usual custom. Hardly had the SMERSH men
finished "plucking" me and taken my notes on political subjects,
along with my map case, and begun to push me as quickly as
possible toward the exit, urged on by the German shellfire rattling
the windowpanes, than I heard myself firmly addressed—yes!
Across the sheer gap separating me from those left behind, the
