556 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

him inhospitably. They drove him out to work in the wet snow,
hungry and unsettled. In two days he never had a chance to dry
out his shirts nor even a chance to stuff his mattress with pine
needles. And right then they ordered him to turn in everything he
had that was government issue and once again they scooped him
up and whisked him still farther—to Vorkuta. It seemed quite
evident from everything that had happened that the Minister was
determined to destroy Shendrik, and not him alone but the entire
group in his prisoner transport. At Vorkuta they didn‘t touch
Shendrik for a whole month. He went out to general—assignment
work, even though he had not yet recovered from his travels, but
he had begun to reconcile himself to his Arctic fate. And then
suddenly one day they called him out of the mine, and chased
him off breathless to the camp to turn in everything he had that
was government issue, and in one hour‘s time he was being carried
off to the south. Now by this time it had already begun to smell
of personal vengeance! They took him to Moscow Prison No. 18.
They held him in the cell there for one month. And then he was
summoned to some lieutenant colonel who asked him: "Where the
hell have you been? Are you really a mechanical engineer?" And
Shendrik confessed that he was. And then they took him off to
none other than, yes, the Paradise Islands! (Yes, there are such
islands in the Archipelago!)

This coming and going of people, these destinies, and these
stories greatly enliven the transit prisons. And the old camp
veterans advise newcomers: Lie down and take it easy. They
feed you the guaranteed minimum here,° and you don‘t have to
tire your back. And when it‘s not crowded you can sleep as much
as you want to. So just stretch out and lie there from one handout
of gruel to the next. The food is sparse, but the sleeping is good.
Only those who know what general—assignment work is in the
camps will understand that a transit prison is a rest home, a hap—
piness on our path. And one more advantage too: when you sleep
in the daytime the hours pass more quickly. If you can just kill off
the day, the night will go away on its own.

True, recalling that labor created the human being and that
only labor can reform the criminal, and sometimes having aux—
iliary projects, and sometimes acting as subcontractors in order

8. The rations guaranteed by Gulag when no work is being done.
