In the Engine Room | 289

higher—ups expect of you (furthermore there‘s a telephone if you
still have any doubts). And, following the example of the OSO‘s,
sentences might even be typed out ahead of time, with only the
prisoner‘s name to be added later, by hand. And in 1942 Stra—
khovich cried out during a session of the military tribunal of the
Leningrad Military District: "But I could not have been recruited
by Ignatovsky when I was only ten years old!" But the presiding
judge barked back: "Don‘t slander the Soviet intelligence serv—
ice!" The whole thing had been predetermined long before: each
and every one of the Ignatovsky group was to be sentenced to be
shot. Some man named Lipov got included in the group, but no
one from the group knew him and he knew none of them either.
Well, so, all right, Lipov got ten years.

How hugely the predetermination of sentences contributed to
easing the thorny life of a judge. It wasn‘t so much a mental relief,
in the sense that one didn‘t have to think, as it was a moral relief.
You didn‘t have to torture yourself with worry that you might
make a mistake in a sentence and make orphans out of your own
little children. And the predetermination of sentences could dis—
pose even so immovable a judge as Ulrikh to good humor. (And
what major execution had he not pronounced?) In 1945, the Mili—
tary Collegium was hearing the case of the "Estonian separatists."
Short, stocky, good—humored Ulrikh was presiding. He didn‘t pass
up a single opportunity to joke not only with his colleagues but
also with the prisoners. (After all, that‘s what humaneness is! A
new trait—where had it ever been seen?) Having learned that
Susi was a lawyer, he said to him with a smile: "Well, so now
your profession can be of some use to you!" Well, there is no need
to quarrel. Why be embittered? The court routine proceeded
pleasantly. They smoked right at the judge‘s table, and at a con—

 

national unemployment, the courts reduced the number of verdicts which sen—
tenced prisoners to corrective labor while they continued to live at home and
increased short—term prison sentences. These cases involved only nonpolitical
offenders, of course. As a result, prisons were overcrowded with short—termers
serving sentences of up to six months, and not enough use was being made of
them in labor colonies. At the beginning of 1929, the People‘s Commissariat of
Justice of the U.S.S.R., in Circular No. 5, condemned short—term sentences and,
on November 6, 1929, the eve of the twelfth anniversary of the October Revolu—
tion, when the country was supposedly entering on the construction of socialism,
a decree of the Central Executive Committee and the Council of People‘s Com—
missars simply forbade all sentences of less than one year!
