The Law Matures | 379

actual damage done but remained within the area of operational
planning, yet it was intended to lead to a nationwide crisis and even
to economic paralysis in 1930! But it didn‘t—and only because of the
competitive industrial and financial plans of the masses (doubling
the figures!). ...

"Yeah, yeah, yeah," begins the skeptical reader.

What? That isn‘t enough for you? But if, at the trial, we repeat
every point and chew it over five or eight times, then perhaps
it turns out not to be so negligible?

"Yeah, yeah, yeah." The reader of the sixties nonetheless
sticks to his own view. "Mightn‘t all that have happened precisely
because of those competing industrial and financial plans? Aren‘t
things bound to be out of balance if any union meeting, without
consulting Gosplan, can twist the ratios around as it pleases?"

Oh, the prosecutor‘s bread is bitter! After all, they decided
to publish every last word! That meant that engineers would
read it too. "You‘ve made your bed, now lie in it." And Krylenko
rushed in fearlessly to discuss and to question and cross—question
engineering details! And the inside pages and inserts of the
enormous newspapers were full of small print about fine tech—
nical points. The notion was that every reader would be over—
come by the sheer mass of material, that he wouldn‘t have enough
time, even if he used up all his evenings and his rest days too,
and so he wouldn‘t read it all but would only notice the refrain
following every few paragraphs: "We were wreckers, wreckers,
wreckers."

But suppose someone did begin, and read every last line?

In that case, he would come to see, through the banality of self—
accusations, composed with such ineptitude and stupidity, that
the Lubyanka boa constrictor had gotten involved in something
outside its competence, its own kind of work, that what breaks
free of the crude noose is the strong—winged thought of the
twentieth century. There the prisoners are: in the dock, submis—
sive, repressed—but their thought leaps out. Even their terrified,
tired tongues manage to name everything with its proper name
and to tell us everything.

. . . Here is the situation in which they worked. Kalinnikov: "Well;,
to be sure, a situation of technical distrust was created." Larichev:
"Whether we wanted to or not, we still had to produce that 42 millions
