594 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

I could have told tales too. I would even have liked to. But no,
I didn‘t really want to any more. Like a cow, the war had licked
away four of my years. I no longer believed that it had all actually
happened and I didn‘t want to remember it. Two years here, two
years in the Archipelago, had dimmed in my mind all the roads of
the front, all the comradeship of the front line, had totally dark—
ened them.

One wedge knocks out another.

And after spending a few hours among free people, here is
what I feel: My lips are mute; there is no place for me among
them; my hands are tied here. I want free speech! I want to go
back to my native land! I want to go home to the Archipelago!

In the morning I deliberately forgot my postcard on an upper
shelf: after all, the conductor will get around to cleaning up the
car; she will carry it to a mailbox—if she is a human being.

We emerge onto the square in front of the Northern Station in
Moscow. Again my jailers are newcomers to Moscow, and don‘t
know the city. We travel on streetcar "B," and I make the de—
cisions for them. There is a mob at the streetcar stop in the middle
of the square; everyone is on the way to work at this hour. One
jailer climbs up to the streetcar motorman and shows him his MVD
identity card. We are allowed to stand imposingly on the front
platform for the whole trip, as if we were deputies of the Moscow
Soviet, and we don‘t bother to get tickets. An old man isn‘t
allowed to board there—he isn‘t an invalid and he has to board
in the rear like the others.

We approach Novoslobodskaya and disembark—and for the
first time I see Butyrki Prison from the outside, even though it‘s
the fourth time I‘ve been brought there and I can draw its in—
terior plan without difficulty. Oof, what a grim, high wall stretches
for two blocks there! The hearts of the Muscovites shiver when
they see the steel maw of its gates slide open. But I leave the
sidewalks of Moscow behind me without regret, and as I enter
that tower of the gatehouse I feel I am returning home. I smile at
the first courtyard and recognize the familiar main doors of
carved wood. And it‘s nothing at all to me that they are now
going to make me face the wall—and they already have—and
ask me: "Last name? Given name and patronymic? Year of
birth?"
