4 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

the veriest simpleton among us, drawing on all life‘s experience,
can gasp out only: "Me? What for?"

And this is a question which, though repeated millions and
millions of times before, has yet to receive an answer.

Arrest is an instantaneous, shattering thrust, expuls1on somer—
sault from one state into another.

We have been happily borne—or perhaps have unhappily
dragged our weary way—down the long and crooked streets of
our lives, past all kinds of walls and fences made of rotting wood,
rammed earth, brick, concrete, iron railings. We have never given
a thought to what lies behind them. We have never tried to pene—
trate them with our vision or our understanding. But there is
where the Gulag country begins, right next to us, two yards away
from us. In addition, we have failed to notice an enormous num—
ber of closely fitted, well—disguised doors and gates in these
fences. All those gates were prepared for us, every last one! And
all of a sudden the fateful gate swings quickly open, and four
white male hands, unaccustomed to physical labor but none—
theless strong and tenacious, grab us by the leg, arm, collar, cap,
ear, and drag us in like a sack, and the gate behind us, the gate to
our past life, is slammed shut once and for all.

That‘s all there is to it! You are arrested!

And you‘ll find nothing better to respond with than a lamblike
bleat: "Me? What for?"

That‘s what arrest is: it‘s a blinding flash and a blow which
shifts the present instantly into the past and the impossible into
omnipotent actuality.

That‘s all. And neither for the first hour nor for the first day
will you be able to grasp anything else.

Except that in your desperation the fake circus moon will blink
at you: "It‘s a mistake! They‘ll set things right!"

And everything which is by now comprised in the traditional,
even literary, image of an arrest will pile up and take shape, not
in your own disordered memory, but in what your family and
your neighbors in your apartment remember:; The sharp night—
time ring or the rude knock at the door. The insolent entrance
of the unwiped jackboots of the unsleeping State Security oper—
atives. The frightened and cowed civilian witness at their backs.
(And what function does this civilian witness serve? The victim
doesn‘t even dare think about it and the operatives don‘t remem—
