260 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

handed over many wagonloads of old people, women, and
children who did not want to return to their native Cossack
rivers. This great hero, monuments to whom will in time cover
all England, ordered that they, too, be surrendered to their
deaths.

In addition to the hurriedly created Vlasov divisions, quite a
few Russian subunits went right on turning sour in the depths of
the German Army, wearing standard German uniforms. They
finished out the war on various sectors and in different ways.

I myself fell under Vlasov fire a few days before my arrest.
There were Russians in the East Prussian "sack" which we had
surrounded, and one night at the end of January their unit tried
to break through our position to the west, without artillery prepa—
ration, in silence. There was no firmly delineated front in any
case, and they penetrated us in depth, catching my sound—locator
battery, which was out in front, in a pincers. I just barely
managed to pull it back by the last remaining road. But then I
went back for a piece of damaged equipment, and, before dawn,
I watched as they suddenly rose from the snow where they‘d dug
in, wearing their winter camouflage cloaks, hurled themselves
with a cheer on the battery of a 152—millimeter gun battalion at
Adlig Schwenkitten, and knocked out twelve heavy cannon with
hand grenades before they could fire a shot. Pursued by their
tracer bullets, our last little group ran almost two miles in fresh
snow to the bridge across the Passarge River. And there they
were stopped.

Soon after that I was arrested. And now, on the eve of the
Victory Parade, here we all were sitting together on the board
bunks of the Butyrki. I took puffs from their cigarettes and they
took puffs from mine. And paired with one or another of them,
I used to carry out the six—bucket tin latrine barrel.

Many of the Vlasov men, like the "spies for hire," were

 

refusing to occupy Manchuria, for strengthening Mao Tse—tung in China, and
for giving Kim Il Sung control of half Korea! What bankruptcy of political
thought! And when, subsequently, the Russians pushed out Mikolajczyk, when
Benes and Masaryk came to their ends, when Berlin was blockaded, and Buda—
pest flamed and fell silent, and Korea went up in smoke, and Britain‘s Con—
servatives fled from Suez, could one really believe that those among them
with the most accurate memories did not at least recall that episode of the
Cossacks?
