Tyurzak | 461

They undertook to defend all this! And the prison authorities
undertook to take it all away from them. And a silent battle began
in which no artillery shells were fired, and rifle shots only rarely,
and the crash of broken glass wasn‘t audible even half a verst
away. A mute struggle went on for vestiges of freedom, for
vestiges of the right to have individual opinions, and it went on
for almost twenty years—but no large, richly illustrated volumes
describing it have ever been published. And all its ups—and—downs,
its catalogue of victories and of defeats, are almost lost to us now,
because, after all, there is no written language in the Archipelago
and oral communication is broken off when people die. And only
random particles of that struggle have occasionally come down to
us, illuminated by moonlight that is indirect and indistinet.

And since that time we have grown so supercilious! We are
familiar with tank battles; we know about nuclear explosions.
What kind of struggle is it over the question of whether cells are
kept locked and whether prisoners, to exercise their right to com—
municate, can openly spell out messages to each other by knock—
ing on the walls, shout from window to window, drop notes from
floor to floor on threads, and insist that at least the elected spokes—
men of the various party fractions be allowed to move freely
among the cells? What sort of a struggle is it to us when the chief
of the Lubyanka goes into the cell and the Anarchist Anna
G va (in 1926) or the SR Katya Olitskaya (1931) refuses
to stand up when he enters? And that savage beast thought up a
punishment for Katya: to deprive her of the right to go to the
toilet. What kind of struggle was it when two girls, Shura and
Vera (in 1925), in protest against the Lubyanka rule—intended
to stifle personality—that conversations may be carried on only
in whispers, sang loudly in their cell (only about lilacs and the
spring), and thereupon the prison chief, the Latvian Dukes,
dragged them through the corridor to the toilet by their hair? Or
when the students in a Stolypin car en route from Leningrad
(1924) sang revolutionary songs and the convoy thereupon de—
prived them of water? They yelled out: "A Tsarist convoy
wouldn‘t have done that!" and the convoy beat them. Or when the
SR Kozlov, at the transit prison in Kem, loudly called the guards
"executioners"—and because of that was dragged off and
beaten?

After all, we have gotten used to regarding as valor only valor

 
