The Law Matures | 399

"I would like to see that, in consequence of the present trial of
the Promparty, the dark and shameful past of the entire intelli—
gentsia will be buried once and for all."**

Larichev joined in: "This caste must be destroyed! . . . There
is not and there cannot be loyalty among engineers!""" And Och—
kin too: The intelligentsia "is some kind of mush. As the state
accuser has said, it has no backbone, and this constitutes un—
conditional spinelessness. . ... How immeasurably superior is the
sensitivity of the proletariat.""*

So now just why should such diligent collaborators be shot?

And that was the way the history of our intelligentsia has been
written for decades—from the anathema of 1920 (the reader
will remember: "not the brains of the nation, but shit," and "the
ally of the black generals," and "the hired agent of imperialism")
right up to the anathema of 1930.

So should anyone be surprised that the word ‘"intelligentsia"
got established here in Russia as a term of abuse.

That is how the public trials were manufactured. Stalin‘s
searching mind had once and for all attained its ideal. (Those
blunderheads Hitler and Goebbels would come to envy it and rush
into their shameful failure with the burning of the Reichstag.)

The standard had been set, and now it could be retained
perennially and performed over again every season—according
to the wishes of the Chief Producer. And in fact the Chief wanted
another within three months. The rehearsal time was very short,
but that was all right. Come and see the show! Only in our
theater! A premiere.

M. The Case of the All—Union Bureau of the Mensheviks—
March 1—9, 1931

The case was heard by a Special Assize of the Supreme Court,
the presiding judge in this case, for some reason, being N. M.
Shvernik. Otherwise everyone was in his proper place—Antonov—
Saratovsky, Krylenko, and his assistant Roginsky. The pro—

29. Ibid., p. 49.

30. Ibid., p. 508.

31. Ibid., p. 509. For some reason, the main thing about the proletariat is
always, believe it or not, sensitivity. Always via the nostrils.
