The Law Matures | 375

From 1920 on, he had been a professor at the Mining Institute
and a consultant to the Gosplan—the State Planning Commis—
sion. (For more details about him see Part III, Chapter 10.)

They picked this Palchinsky to be the chief defendant in a
grandiose new trial. However, the thoughtless Krylenko, stepping
into what was for him a new field—engineering—not only knew
nothing about the resistance of materials but could not even
conceive of the potential resistance of souls . . . despite ten
years of already sensational activity as a prosecutor. Krylenko‘s
choice turned out to be a mistake. Palchinsky resisted every
pressure the OGPU knew—and did not surrender; in fact, he
died without signing any sort of nonsense at all. N. K. von Meck
and A. F. Velichko were subjected to torture with him, and they,
too, appear not to have given in. We do not yet know whether
they died while under torture or whether they were shot. But
they proved it was possible to resist and that it was possible not
to give in—and thus they left behind a spotlight of reproach to
shine on all the famous subsequent defendants.

To cover up his defeat, on May 24, 1929, Yagoda published
a brief GPU communiqué on the execution of the three for large—
scale wrecking, which also announced the condemnation of many
other unidentified persons."

But how much time had been spent for nothing! Nearly a whole
year!l And how many nights of interrogation! And how much
inventiveness on the part of the interrogators! And all to no
avail. And Krylenko had to start over from the very beginning
and find a leader who was both brilliant and strong, and at the
same time utterly weak and totally pliable. But so little did he
understand this cursed breed of engineers that another whole
year was spent in unsuccessful tries. From the summer of 1929
on, he worked over Khrennikov, but Khrennikov, too, died
without agreeing to play a dastardly role. They twisted old
Fedotov, but he was too old, and furthermore he was a textile
engineer, which was an unprofitable field. And one more year
was wasted! The country was waiting for the all—inclusive
wreckers‘ trial, and Comrade Stalin was waiting—but things
just couldn‘t seem to fall into place for Krylenko.® It was only

5. Izvestiya, May 24, 1929.

6. And it is quite possible that this failure of his was held against him by
the Leader and led to the symbolic destruction of the prosecutor—on the very
same guillotine as his victims.
