294 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

secutive hours, one could see, through the door of the conference
room, bowls of fruit on a table set with a white tablecloth. If they
weren‘t in a hurry, they enjoyed delivering their sentence "with
a psychological twist" : ". . . sentenced to the supreme measure of
punishment!" And then a pause. The judges would look the
condemned man in the eye. It was interesting to see how he took
it. What was he feeling at that moment? Only then would the
verdict continue: ". . . but taking into consideration the sincere
repentance . .."

On the walls of the waiting room messages had been scratched
with nails and scrawled in pencil: "I got execution," "I got twenty—
five," "I got a ‘tenner!‘" They didn‘t clean off these graffiti; they
served an educational purpose. Be scared; bow down; don‘t
think that you can change anything by your behavior. Even if you
were to speak in your own defense with the eloquence of Demos—
thenes, in a hall empty except for a handful of interrogators—
like Olga Sliozberg in 1936, at the Supreme Court—it would
not help you in the slightest. All you could do would be to increase
your sentence from ten years to execution. For instance, if you
were to shout: "You are fascists! I am ashamed to have been a
member of your Party for several years!" (Nikolai Semyonovich
Daskal did it in 1937, at the Special Collegium of the Azov—
Black Sea Province at Maikop, presided over by Kholik.) In
that situation what they did was fabricate a new case and do you
in once and for all.

Chavdarov has described an incident in which the accused
suddenly repudiated at their trial all the false testimony they had
given during the interrogation. And what happened? If there
was any hesitation while glances were exchanged, it lasted no
more than a few seconds. The prosecutor asked for a recess,
without explaining why. The interrogators and their tough—boy
helpers dashed in from the interrogation prison. All the prisoners,
distributed among separate boxes, were given a good beating
all over again and promised another after the next recess. The
recess came to an end. Once again the judges questioned all of
them—and this time they all confessed.

Aleksandr Grigoryevich Karetnikov, the Director of the Textile
Research Institute, provided an example of outstanding astute—
ness. Just before the session of the Military Collegium of the
Supreme Court was to begin, he sent word through the guard
