The Law Becomes a Man | 367

trial: the death sentences were to remain in effect, but not to be
carried out for the time being. The further fate of those con—
demned would depend, then, on the conduct of those SR‘s who
had not yet been arrested, apparently including those abroad as
well. In other words: If you move against us, we‘ll squash them.

In the fields of Russia they were reaping the second peacetime
harvest. There was no shooting except in the courtyards of the
Cheka. (Perkhurov in Yaroslavl, Metropolitan Veniamin in
Petrograd. And always, always, always.) Beneath the azure sky
our first diplomats and journalists sailed abroad across the blue
waters. And the Central Executive Committee of Workers‘ and
Peasants‘ Deputies thrust into its pockets eternal hostages.

The members of the ruling Party read all sixty issues of Pravda
devoted to the trial—for they all read the papers—and all of
them said: "Yes, yes, yes." No one mumbled: "No!"

What, then, were they surprised at in 1937? What was there to
complain about? Hadn‘t all the foundations of lawlessness been
laid—first by the extrajudicial reprisals of the Cheka, and then
by these early trials and this young Code? Wasn‘t 1937 also
expedient (expedient for Stalin‘s purposes and, perhaps, History‘s,
too, for that matter)?

Prophetically, Krylenko let it slip that they were judging not
the past but the future.

Only the first swath cut by the scythe is difficult.

On or about August 20, 1924, Boris Viktorovich Savinkov
crossed the Soviet border. He was immediately arrested and taken
to the Lubyanka.*" In all, the interrogation lasted for just one

41. Many hypotheses were advanced about his return. Only a little while
ago, a certain Ardamatsky, a person obviously connected with the archives
and personnel of the Committee for State Security, published a story which,
despite being adorned with pretentiously inflated literary gewgaws, is evidently
close to the truth. (The magazine Neva, No. 11, 1967.) Having induced certain
of Savinkov‘s agents to betray him and having ‘deceived others, the GPU used
them to set a foolproof trap, convincing Savinkov that inside Russia a large
underground organization was languishing for lack of a worthy leader! It
would have been impossible to devise a more effective trap! And it would have
been impossible for Savinkov, after such a confused and sensational life, merely
to spin it out quietly to the end in Nice. He couldn‘t bear not trying to pull off
one more feat and not returning to Russia and his death.
