222 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

example to the others taking the course. The returned "spy"
invited Yuri to drink a quart of vodka with him and, crimson
from drink, leaned across the table and disclosed: "Yuri Nikola—
yevich! The Soviet Command promises you forgiveness if you will
come over to us immediately."

Yuri trembled. And that heart which had already grown hard,
which had renounced everything, was flooded with warmth. The
Motherland? Accursed, unjust, but nonetheless still precious!
Forgiveness? And he could go back to his own family? And
walk along Kamennoostrovsky in Leningrad? All right, so what?
We are Russian! If you will forgive us, we will return, and we
will behave ourselves, oh, how well! That year and a half since
he had left the POW camp had not brought Yuri happiness. He
did not repent, but he could see no future either. And when,
‘while drinking, he encountered other such unrepentant Russians,
he learned that they realized clearly that they had nothing to
stand on. It wasn‘t real life. The Germans were twisting them to
.suit themselves. But now, when the Germans were obviously
— losing the war, Yuri had been offered an out. His Chief, who
liked him, confided that he had a second estate in Spain which
they could head for together if the German Reich went up in
smoke. But there across the table sat his drunken compatriot,
coaxing him at the risk of his own life: "Yuri Nikolayevich! The
Soviet Command values your experience and knowledge. They
want you to tell them about the organization of the German in—
telligence service."

For two weeks Yuri was torn by hesitation. But during the
Soviet offensive beyond the Vistula, after he had led his school
well out of the way, he ordered them to turn in to a quiet Polish
farm, lined them all up, and declared: "I am going over to the
Soviet side! There is a free choice for everyone!" And these
sad—sack spies, with the milk hardly dry on their lips, who just
one hour before had pretended loyalty to the German Reich, now
cried out with enthusiasm: "Hurrah! Us too!" (They were shout—
ing "hurrah" for their future lives at hard labor.)

Then the entire spy school hid until the arrival of the Soviet
tanks; and then came SMERSH. Yuri saw his boys no more.
They took him off by himself and gave him ten days to describe
the whole history of the school, the programs, the sabotage
assignments. He really thought that they valued his "experience
