514 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

expanded the MVD staffs?), the Ministry sorted out the millions
of piles of cases and started sending along with each sentenced
prisoner a sealed envelope that contained his case file and, visible
through a slot in the envelope, his route and destination, inserted
for the convoy (and the convoy wasn‘t supposed to know any—
thing more than that—because the contents of the file might have
a corrupting influence). So then, if you were lying on the middle
bunk, and the sergeant stopped right next to you, and you could
read upside down, you might be fast enough to read that some—
one was being taken to Knyazh—Pogost and that you were being
sent to Kargopol.

So now there would be more worries! What was Kargopol
Camp? Who had ever heard of it? What kind of general—assign—
ment work did they have there? (There did exist general—assign—
ment work which was fatal, and some that was not that bad.)
Was this a death camp or not?

And then how had you failed to let your family know in the
hurry of leaving, and they thought you were still in the Stalino—
gorsk Camp near Tula? If you were very nervous about this and
very inventive, you might succeed in solving that problem too:
you might find someone with a piece of pencil lead half an inch
long and a piece of crumpled paper. Making sure the convoy
doesn‘t see you from the corridor (you are forbidden to lie with
your feet toward the corridor; your head has to be in that direc—
tion), hunched over and facing in the opposite direction, you
write to your family, between lurches of the car, that you have
suddenly been taken from where you were and are being sent
somewhere else, and you might be able to send only one letter
a year from your new destination, so let them be prepared for
this eventuality. You have to fold your letter into a triangle and
carry it to the toilet in the hope of a lucky break: they might just
take you there while approaching a station or just after passing
a station, and the convoy guard on the car platform might get
careless, and you can quickly press down on the flush pedal and,
using your body as a shield, throw the letter into the hole. It will
get wet and soiled, but it might fall right through and land be—
tween the rails. Or it might even get through dry, and the draft
beneath the car will catch and whirl it, and it will fall under the
wheels or miss them and land on the downward slope of the
