358 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

increasing self—assurance and in ever heavier doses, and which, in
1937, would result in dazzling success. This tone created a com—
mon ground—against the rest of the world—between those doing
the judging and those who were being judged, and it played on
the defendant‘s particular soft spot. From the prosecutor‘s ros—
trum, they said to the SR‘s: "After all, you and we are revolu—
tionaries! [We! You and we—that adds up to us!] And how
could you have fallen so low as to join with the Cadets? [Yes, no
doubt your heart is breaking!] Or with the officers? Or to teach
the aristocratic, reactionary, dilettante students your brilliantly
worked—out scheme of conspiratorial operation?"

None of the defendants‘ replies is available to us. Did any of
them point out that the particular characteristic of the October
coup had been to declare war immediately on all the other parties
and forbid them to join forces? ("They‘re not hauling you in, so
don‘t you dare peep!") But for some reason one gets the feeling
that some of the defendants sat there with downcast eyes and
that some of them truly had divided hearts: just how could they
have fallen so low? After all, for the prisoner who‘d been brought
in from a dark cell, the friendly, sympathetic attitude of the
prosecutor in the big bright hall struck home very effectively.

And Krylenko discovered another very, very logical little path
which was to prove very useful to Vyshinsky when he applied it
against Kamenev and Bukharin: On entering into an alliance with
the bourgeoisie, you accepted money from them. At first you took
it for the cause, only for the cause, and in no wise for Party pur—
poses. But where is the boundary line? Who can draw that divid—
ing line? After all, isn‘t the cause a Party cause also? And so you
sank to the level—you, the Socialist Revolutionary Party—of
being supported by the bourgeoisie! Where was your revolutionary
pride?

A full quota of charges—and then some—had been piled up.
And the tribunal could have gone out to confer and thereupon
nailed each of the prisoners with his well—merited execution—but,
alas, there was a big mix—up:

a. Everything the Socialist Revolutionary Party had been ac—
cused of related to 1918.

b. Since then, on February 27, 1919, an amnesty had been
declared for SR‘s exclusively, which pardoned all their past
