164 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

there for losing his horse and Popkov for maltreating his carbine.
Yes, just a moment, I can remember more. They sewed me a map
case out of German hide—not human, but from a car seat. But I
didn‘t have a strap for it, and I was unhappy about that. Then all
of a sudden they saw some partisan commissar, from the local
District Party Committee, wearing just the right kind of strap—
and they took it away from him: we are the army; we have sen—
iority! (Remember Senchenko, the Security officer, who stole a
map case and a dispatch case?) Finally, I coveted that scarlet
box, and I remember how they took it away and got if for me.

That‘s what shoulder boards do to a human being. And where
have all the exhortations of grandmother, standing before an
ikon, gone! And where the young Pioneer‘s daydreams of future
sacred Equality! |

And at the moment when my life was turned upside down and
the SMERSH officers at the brigade command point tore off those
cursed shoulder boards, and took my belt away and shoved me
along to their automobile, I was pierced to the quick by worrying
how, in my stripped and sorry state, I was going to make my way
through the telephone operator‘s room. The rank and file must
not see me in that condition!

The day after my arrest my march of penance began: the most
recent "catch" was always sent from the army counterintelligence
center to the counterintelligence headquarters of the front. They
herded us on foot from Osterode to Brodnica.

When they led me out of the punishment cell, there were al—
ready seven prisoners there in three and a half pairs standing
with their backs to me. Six of them had on well—worn Russian
Army overcoats which had been around for a long time, and on
their backs had been painted, in indelible white paint, "SU,"
meaning "Soviet Union." I already knew that mark, having seen
it more than once on the backs of our Russian POW‘s as they
wandered sadly and guiltily toward the army that was approach—
ing to free them. They had been freed, but there was no shared
happiness in that liberation. Their compatriots glowered at them
even more grimly than at the Germans. And as soon as they
crossed the front lines, they were arrested and imprisoned.

The seventh prisoner was a German civilian in a black three—
