The Supreme Measure | 443

In one household I am familiar with, where some former zeks
live, the following ceremony takes place: On March 5, the day
of the death of the Head Murderer, they spread out on the table
all the photographs of those who were shot and those who died
in camps that they have been able to collect—several dozen of
them. And throughout the day solemnity reigns in the apartment
—somewhat like that of a church, somewhat like that of a
museum. There is funeral music. Friends come to visit, to look at
the photographs, to keep silent, to listen, to talk softly together.
And then they leave without saying good—bye.

And that is how it ought to be everywhere. At least these
deaths would have left a small scar on our hearts.

So that they should not have died in vain/

And I, too, have a few such chance photographs. Look at
these at least:

Viktor Petrovich Pokrovsky—shot in Moscow in 1918.

Aleksandr Shtrobinder, a student—shot in Petrograd in
1918.

Vasily Ivanovich Anichkov—shot in the Lubyanka in 1927.

Aleksandr Andreyevich Svechin, a professor of the General
Staff—shot in 1935.

Mikhail Aleksandrovich Reformatsky, an agronomist—shot
in Orel in 1938.
Yelizaveta Yevgenyevna Anichkova—shot in a camp on

the Yenisei in 1942.

How does all that happen? What is it like for people to wait
there? What do they feel? What do they think about? And what
decisions do they come to? And what is it like when they are
taken away? And what do they feel in their last moments? And
how, actually, do they . . . well . . . do they . . . ?

The morbid desire to pierce that curtain is natural. (Even
though it is, of course, never going to happen to any of us.)
And it is natural that those who have survived cannot tell us
about the very end—because, after all, they were pardoned.

What happens next is something the executioners know about.
But the executioners are not about to talk. (Take, for instance,
that famous Uncle Lyosha in the Kresty Prison in Leningrad, who
twisted the prisoner‘s hands behind his back and put handcuffs
