The Ports of the Archipelago | 563

For just two nights they put a special—assignment prisoner in
our cell in Krasnaya Presnya. And he was next to me in the bunk.
He traveled about with special—assignment orders, which meant
that an invoice had been filled out in Central Administration in—
dicating that he was a construction technician and could be used
only in that capacity in his new location, and this went with him
from camp to camp. The special—assignment prisoner was travel—
ing in the common Stolypin cars and was kept in the common
cells of the transit prisons, but he wasn‘t nervous; he was pro—
tected by his personal document, and he wouldn‘t be driven out
to fell timber. A cruel and determined expression was the prin—
cipal trait of this camp veteran‘s face. He had already served out
the greater part of his term. (And I did not yet realize that this
exact expression would in time etch itself on all our faces, because
a cruel and determined expression is the national hallmark of the
Gulag islanders. People with soft, conciliatory expressions die out
quickly on the islands.) He observed our naive floundering with
an ironic smile, just as people look at two—week—old puppies.

What should we expect in camp? Taking pity on us, he taught
us:

"From your very first step in camp everyone will try to deceive
and plunder you. Trust no one but yourself. Look around quickly:
someone may be sneaking up on you to bite you. Eight years ago
I arrived at Kargopollag just as innocent and just as naive as you
are now. They unloaded us from two trains, and the convoy pre—
pared to lead us the six miles to the camp through the deep,
crumbly snow. Three sleds came up beside us. Some hefty chap
whom the convoy didn‘t interfere with came over to us and said:
‘Brothers, put your things on the sleds and we will carry them
there for you.‘ We remembered reading in books that prisoners‘
belongings were carried on carts. And we thought: It isn‘t going
to be all that inhuman in camp; they are concerned about us.
And we loaded our things on the sleds. They left. And we never
saw them again, not even an empty wrapper."

"But how can that happen? Isn‘t there any law there?"

"Don‘t ask idiotic questions. There is a law there. The law of
the taiga, of the jungle. But as for fustice—there never has been
any in Gulag and there never will be. That Kargopol incident
was simply a symbol of Gulag. And you have to get used to some—
thing else too: in camp no one ever does anything for nothing, no
