The Slave Caravans | 585

Pogost to Chibyu) without anything to eat at all. They drank
swamp water and very quickly got dysentery. Some fell by the
wayside out of weakness, and the dogs tore the clothes off those
who had fallen. In Izhma they caught fish by using their trousers
as nets and ate them alive. (And in a certain meadow they were
told: Right here is where you are going to build a railroad from
Kotlas to Vorkuta.)

And in other areas of our European North, prisoner transports
on foot were standard until the time when, on those same routes
and roadbeds built by those earlier zeks, the jolly red cattle cars
rolled along carrying later prisoners.

A particular technique for prisoner transports on foot was
worked out where such transports were frequent and abundant.
When a transport is being taken through the taiga from Knyazh—
Pogost to Veslyana, and suddenly some prisoner falls by the
wayside and can go no farther, what is to be done with him?
Just be reasonable and think about it: what? You aren‘t going
to stop the whole transport. And you aren‘t going to leave one
soldier behind for everyone who falls. There are many prisoners
and only a few soldiers. And what does that mean? The soldier
stays behind for a little while with the fallen prisoner and then
hurries on to catch up with the rest—alone.

Regular transports on foot from Karabas to Spassk were
retained for a long time. It was only twenty to twenty—five miles,
but it had to be covered in one day, with one thousand prisoners
in each transport, many of them very weak. It was expected in
cases like these that many would simply either drop in their
tracks or else fall behind through the indifference and apathy of
dying men—you may shoot at them but they still can‘t go on. They
are not afraid of death, but what about clubs, the indefatigable
beating of the clubs wherever they hit? They are afraid of clubs,
and they will keep going. This is a tested method—that‘s how it
works. And so in these cases the transport column is surrounded
not only by the ordinary chain of machine gunners at a distance
of fifty yards, but also by an inner chain of soldiers armed only
with clubs. Those who have fallen behind get beaten. (As, in
fact, Comrade Stalin prophesied.) They are beaten again and
again. And even when they have no strength at all with which
to go farther, they keep going. And many do miraculously get
