106 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

been arrested but had simply received an official summons to the
Bolshoi Dom—the Big House. He (or she) still had a lot to lose.
He (or she) was frightened of everything—that they wouldn‘t
let him (or her) out today, that they would confiscate his (or
her) belongings or apartment. He would be ready to give all
kinds of testimony and make all kinds of concessions in order to
avoid these dangers. She, of course, would be ignorant of the
Criminal Code, and, at the very least, at the start of the question—
ing they would push a sheet of paper in front of her with a fake
citation from the Code: "I have been warned that for giving false
testimony . . . five years of imprisonment." (In actual fact, under
Article 95, it is two years.) "For refusal to give testimony—five
years . . ." (In actual fact, under Article 92, it is up to three
months.) Here, then, one more of the interrogator‘s basic methods
has entered the picture and will continue to re—enter it.

8. The lie. We lambs were forbidden to lie, but the inter—
rogator could tell all the lies he felt like. Those articles of the law
did not apply to him. We had even lost the yardstick with which
to gauge: what does he get for lying? He could confront us with
as many documents as he chose, bearing the forged signatures
of our kinfolk and friends—and it would be just a skillful inter—
rogation technique.

Intimidation through enticement and lies was the fundamental
method for bringing pressure on the relatives of the arrested per—
son when they were called in to give testimony. "If you don‘t tell
us such and such" (whatever was being asked), "it‘s going to be
the worse for him. . . . You‘ll be destroying him completely."
(How hard for a mother to hear that!)" "Signing this paper"
(pushed in front of the relatives) "is the only way you can save
him" (destroy him).

9. Playing on one‘s affection for those one loved was a game
that worked beautifully on the accused as well. It was the most
effective of all methods of intimidation. One could break even
a totally fearless person through his concern for those he loved.
(Oh, how foresighted was the saying: "A man‘s family are his

11. Under the harsh laws of the Tsarist Empire, close relatives could refuse
to testify. And even if they gave testimony at a preliminary investigation, they
could choose to repudiate it and refuse to permit it to be used in court. And,
curiously enough, kinship or acquaintance with a criminal was never in itself
considered evidence.
