Glossary | 641

Soynarkom. See Council of People‘s Commissars.

Special Board (Russian acronym: OSO). Three—man boards of People‘s
Commissariat of Internal Affairs, with powers to sentence "socially
dangerous" persons without trial; abolished in 1953.

SR. See Socialist Revolutionary Party.

Stolypin car. A railroad car used to transport prisoners, named for
P. A. Stolypin; also known in prison slang as vagonzak, for vagon
zaklyuchennykh (prisoner car).

Supreme Council of the Economy. Highest industrial management
agency in early years of Soviet regime; established in 1917; abol—
ished 1932, when it was divided into industrial ministries.

Supreme Soviet. The national legislature of the Soviet Union, with
counterparts in its constituent republics; meets usually twice a year
to approve decisions taken by the Soviet leadership. Its lawmaking
function is performed between sessions by the Presidium of the
Supreme Soviet; nominally the highest state body in the Soviet
Union.

Time of Troubles. A period of hardship and confusion during the
Polish and Swedish invasions of Russia in the early seventeenth
century.

Union Bureau,. See Mensheviks.

UPK. Code of Criminal Procedure. See Codes.

Verkhtrib. Russian acronym for Supreme Tribunal (1918—1922),
which tried the most important cases in the early Soviet period.

Vikzhel. Railroad workers union, opposed Bolsheviks after 1917
Revolution; acronym stands for All—Russian Executive Committee
of Railroad Workers Union.

VSNKh. See Supreme Council of the Economy.

VTsIK. Acronym for All—Russian Central Executive Committee, the
highest state body of the Russian Soviet Federated Socialist Repub—
lic, the largest Soviet state, from 1917 to 1937, when it was suc—
ceeded by the Presidium of the Republic‘s Supreme Soviet. The
national equivalent of VTsIK was TsIK, the Central Executive
Committee of the U.S.S.R. (1922—1938), which became the Pres—
idium of the national Supreme Soviet.

Workers Opposition. Bolshevik faction that sought greater trade—union
control of industry and greater democracy within Party; its activities
were condemned at Tenth Party Congress in 1921, and some lead—
ers were later expelled from Party and arrested.

Zek. Prison slang for prisoner, derived from zaklyuchenny, Russian
word for "prisoner."

Zemstvo. Local government unit in prerevolutionary Russia.
