598 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

The latrine barrel smelled acrid—everything decayed more
quickly in such heat. Eighty people were stuffed into a cell for
twenty—five—and this was not the limit either. Prisoners lay
tightly packed together on the bunks to left and right and also
on the supplementary planks laid across the aisle, and everywhere
feet were sticking out from under the bunks, and the traditional
Butyrki table—cupboard was pushed back to the latrine barrel.
That was where there was still a piece of unoccupied floor, and
that was where I lay down. And thus it was that whoever got up
to use the latrine barrel before morning had to step across me.

When the order "Get up!" was given, shouted through the swill
trough in the door, everything started to stir: They began to take
up the planks from across the aisles and push the table to the
window. Prisoners came up to interview me—to find out whether
I was a novice or a camp veteran. It turned out that two different
waves had met in the cell: the ordinary wave of freshly sentenced
prisoners being sent off to camp and a reverse wave of camp in—
mates who were all technical specialists—physicists, chemists,
mathematicians, design engineers—all being sent to unknown
destinations, to some sort of thriving scientific research institutes.
(At this point I relaxed: the Minister was not going to hang a
new stretch on me.) I was approached by a man who was middle—
aged, broad—shouldered yet very skinny, with a slightly aquiline
nose:

"Professor Timofeyev—Ressovsky, President of the Scientific
and Technical Society of Cell 75. Our society assembles every day
after the morning bread ration, next to the left window. Perhaps
you could deliver a scientific report to us? What precisely might
it be?"

Caught unaware, I stood before him in my long bedraggled
overcoat and winter cap (those arrested in winter are foredoomed
to go about in winter clothing during the summer too). My
fingers had not yet straightened out that morning and were all
scratched. What kind of scientific report could I give? And right
then I remembered that in camp I had recently held in my hands
for two nights the Smyth Report, the official report of the United
States Defense Department on the first atom bomb, which had
been brought in from outside. The book had been published that
spring. Had anyone in the cell seen it? It was a useless question.
