The Slave Caravans | 579

Barge transport on the Yenisei came to be a regular and
permanent feature for whole decades. In Krasnoyarsk in the
thirties, open—sided sheds were built on the bank, and in the cold
Siberian winters the prisoners would shiver there for a day or
two while they waited for transportation.* The Yenisei prisoner—
transport barges were permanently equipped with dark holds
three decks deep. The only light was what filtered in through the
companionway for the ship‘s ladder. The convoy lived in a little
cabin on deck. Sentries kept watch over the exits from the hold
and over the river to make sure that no one escaped by swimming.
They didn‘t go down into the hold, no matter what groans and
howls for help might come from there. And the prisoners were
never taken up on deck for fresh air. In the prisoner transports
of 1937 and 1938, and 1944 and 1945 (and we can guess it must
have been the same in the interval), no medical assistance what—
ever was provided in the hold. The prisoners lay there lined up
in two rows, one with their heads toward the side of the barge
and the heads of the other row at their feet. The only way to get
to the latrine barrels was to walk over them. The latrine barrels
were not always emptied in time (imagine lugging that barrel
full of sewage up the steep ship‘s ladder to the deck). They
overflowed, and the contents spilled along the deck and seeped
down on those below. And people lay there. They were fed
gruel from casks hauled along the deck. The servers were prison—
ers too, and there, in the eternal darkness (today, perhaps, there
is electricity), by the light of a portable "Bat" kerosene lamp,
they ladled out the food. Such a prisoner transport to Dudinka
sometimes took a month. (Nowadays, of course, they can do it
in a week.) It sometimes happened that the trip dragged out much
longer because of sand bars and other hazards of river travel, and
they wouldn‘t have enough food with them, in which case they
just stopped giving out the food for several days at a time. (And
later on, of course, they never made up for the days they missed.)

At this point the alert reader can without the author‘s help
add that the thieves were on the upper level inside the hold and
closer to the ship‘s ladder—in other words, to light and air. They
had what access they required to the distribution of the bread

4. And V. I. Lenin in 1897 boarded the St. Nicholas in the passenger port
like a free person.
