578 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

where there was a transshipping point for Vorkutlag, and from
there only a stone‘s throw, let‘s say, to Ust—Usa, on a flat—bottomed
barge for ten days. The whole barge was alive with lice, and the
convoy allowed the prisoners to go up on deck one by one and
brush the parasites off into the water. The river transports did not
proceed directly to their destination either, but were sometimes
interrupted to transfer for transshipment, or for portage, or for
stretches covered on foot.

And they had their own transit prisons in this area—built out
of poles or tents—Ust—Usa, Pomozdino, Shchelya—Yur, where
they had their own special system of regulations. They had their
own convoy rules, and of course, their own special commands, and
their own special convoy tricks, and their own special methods
of tormenting the zeks. But it‘s already clear that it is not our task
to describe those particular exotica, so we won‘t even begin.

The Northern Dvina, the Ob, and the Yenisei know when they
began to haul prisoners in barges—during the liquidation of the
"kulaks." These rivers flowed straight north, and their barges
were potbellied and capacious—and it was the only way they
could cope with the task of carting all this gray mass from living
Russia to the dead North. People were thrown into the trough—
like holds and lay there in piles or crawled around like crabs in
a basket. And high up on the deck, as though atop a cliff, stood
guards. Sometimes they transported this mass out in the open
without any cover, and sometimes they covered it with a big
tarpaulin—in order not to look at it, or to guard it better, but
certainly not to keep off the rain. The journey in such a barge was
no longer prisoner transport, but simply death on the installment
plan. Anyway, they gave them hardly anything to eat. Then they
tossed them out in the tundra—and there they didn‘t give them
anything at all to eat. They just left them there to die, alone with
nature.

Prisoner transport by barge on the Northern Dvina (and on the
Vychegda) had not died out even by 1940. That was how A. Y.
Olenyevy was transported. Prisoners in the hold stood tightly
jammed against each other, and not just for a day either. They
urinated in glass jars which were passed from hand to hand and
emptied through the porthole. And anything more substantial
went right in their pants.
