62 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

penalty for intent, but only for preparation, but given a
dialectical reading one can understand intention as prepara—
tion. And "preparation is punished in the same way [i.e., with
the same penalty] as the crime itself" (Criminal Code). In
general, "we draw no distinction between intention and the
crime itself, and this is an instance of the superiority of Soviet
legislation to bourgeois legislation.""*

___ Section 2 listed armed rebellion, seizure of power in the capital
or in the provinces, especially for the purpose of severing any
part of the U.S.S.R. through the use of force. For this the
penalties ranged up to and included execution (as in every
succeeding section).

This was expanded to mean something which could not be
explicitly stated in the article itself but which revolutionary
sense of justice could be counted on to suggest: it applied to
every attempt of any national republic to act upon its right to
leave the U.S.S.R. After all, the word "force" is not defined
in terms of whom it applies to. Even when the entire popula—
tion of a republic wants to secede, if Moscow is opposed, the
attempted secession will be forcible. Thus, all Estonian,
Latvian, Lithuanian, Ukrainian, and Turkestan nationalists
very easily received their tens and their twenty—fives under this
section.

Section 3 was "assisting in any way or by any means a foreign
state at war with the U.S.S.R."

This section made it possible to condemn any citizen who
had been in occupied territory—whether he had nailed on the
heel of a German soldier‘s shoe or sold him a bunch of radishes.
And it could be applied to any citizeness who had helped lift
the fighting spirit of an enemy soldier by dancing and spending
the night with him. Not everyone was actually sentenced under
this section—because of the huge numbers who had been in
occupied territory. But everyone who had been in occupied
territory could have been sentenced under it.

Section 4 spoke about (fantastic!) aid to the international
bourgeoisie.

28. A. Y. Vyshinsky (editor), Of Tyurem k Vospitateinym Uchrezhdeniyam
(From Prisons to Rehabilitative Institutions), a collection of articles published
, by the Criminal Policy Institute, Moscow, Sovetskoye Zakonodatelstvo Pub—
lishing House, 1934.
