324 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

for these awful crimes? Will not the reader‘s revolutionary con—
science prompt the answer? To be shot, of course. And that is
just what Krylenko did demand—for Samarin and Kuznetsov.

But while they were fussing around with these damned legal
formalities, and listening to too many long speeches from too
many bourgeois lawyers (speeches which "for technical reasons"
we will not cite here), it turned out that capital punishment had
been . . . abolished! What a fix! It just couldn‘t be! What had
happened? It developed that Dzerzhinsky had issued this order to
the Cheka (the Cheka, without capital punishment?). But had it
been extended to the tribunals by the Council of People‘s Com—
missars? Not yet. Krylenko cheered up. And he continued to de—
mand execution by shooting, on the following grounds:

"Even if we suppose that the consolidation of the Republic has
removed the immediacy of threat from such persons, it seems
nonetheless indubitable that in this period of creative effort . . .
a purge . . . of the old turncoat leaders . . . is required by revolu—
tionary necessity." And further: "Soviet power is proud of the
decree of the Cheka abolishing the death penalty." But this "still
does not force us to conclude that the question of the abolition of
capital punishment has been decided once and for all . . . for
the entire period of Soviet rule."""

That was quite prophetic! Capital punishment would return—
and very soon too! After all, what a long line still remained to
‘be rubbed out! (Yes, including Krylenko too, and many of his
class brothers as well.)

And, indeed, the tribunal was submissive and sentenced
Samarin and Kuznetsov to be shot, but they did manage to tack
on a recommendation for clemency: to be imprisoned in a.con—
centration camp until the final victory over world imperialism!
(They would still be sitting there today!) And as for "the best
that the clergy could produce"—his sentence was fifteen years,
commuted to five.

Other defendants as well were dragged into this trial in order
to add at least a little substance to the charges. Among them
were some monks and teachers of Zvenigorod, involved in the
Zvenigorod affair in the summer of 1918, but for some reason
not brought to trial for a year and a half (or they might have
been, but were now being tried again, since it was expedient).

50. Ibid., p. 81.
