First Cell, First Love | 183

a cylinder lock, a shelf dropped from the wall onto each stump
and remained there for seven hours (in other words, during the
hours of interrogation, since there was no daytime interrogation
at Sukhanovka at all), and a little straw mattress large enough
for a child also dropped down. During the day, the stool was
exposed and free, but one was forbidden to sit on it. In addition,
a table lay, like an ironing board, on four upright pipes. The
"fortochka" in the window—the small hinged pane for ventilation
—was always closed except for ten minutes in the morning when
the guard cranked it open. The glass in the little window was
reinforced. There were never any exercise periods out of doors.
Prisoners were taken to the toilet at 6 a.M. only—i.e., when no
one‘s stomach needed it. There was no toilet period in the eve—
ning. There were two guards for each block of seven cells, so
that was why the prisoners could be under almost constant in—
spection through the peephole, the only interruption being the
time it took the guard to step past two doors to a third. And that
was the purpose of silent Sukhanovka: to leave the prisoner not
a single moment for sleep, not a single stolen moment for privacy.
You were always being watched and always in their power.

But if you endured the whole duel with insanity and all the
trials of loneliness, and had stood firm, you deserved your first
cell! And now when you got into it, your soul would heal.

If you had surrendered, if you had given in and betrayed every—
one, you were also ready for your first cell. But it would have
been better for you not to have lived until that happy moment
and to have died a victor in the cellar, without having signed a
single sheet of paper.

Now for the first time you were about to see people who were
not your enemies. Now for the first time you were about to see
others who were alive,* who were traveling your road, and whom
you could join to yourself with the joyous word "we."

Yes, that word which you may have despised out in freedom,
when they used it as a substitute for your own individuality
("All of us, like one man!" Or: "We are deeply angered!" Or:

4. And if this was in the Big House in Leningrad during the siege, you may
also have seen cannibals. Those who had eaten human fiesh, those who had
traded in human livers from dissecting rooms, were for some reason kept by
the MGB with the political prisoners.
