638 | clossary

Council of People‘s Commissars. Name given the Soviet cabinet (gov—
ernment) before 1946, when it became the Council of Ministers;
also known by Russian acronym Sovnarkom.

Crimean Tatars. Exiled by Stalin to Central Asia in 1944 on charges
of collaboration with Germans.

Dashnak. Anti—Bolshevik group in Armenia after 1917 Revolution.

Decembrists. Group of Russian officers who took part in unsuccessful
liberal uprising against Nicholas I in December, 1825.

Doctors‘ case. The arrest of leading Kremlin physicians, most of
them Jews, in 1952 on trumped—up charges of plotting against the
lives of Soviet leaders. At least one, Y. G. Etinger, is believed to
have died under interrogation; the others were released after Stalin‘s
death in 1953.

Famine Relief, State Commission for. A Soviet governmental body,
set up in 1921—1922; also known by the Russian acronym Pom—
gol.

GPU. Designation for Soviet secret police in 1922; acronym for
Russian words meaning State Political Administration; continued
to be used popularly after 1922, when the official designation be—
came OGPU, acronym for United State Political Administration.

Gulag. The Soviet penal system under Stalin; a Russian acronym for
Chief Administration of Corrective Labor Camps.

Hehalutz. Zionist movement that prepared young Jews for settling in
Holy Land; it founded most of the kibbutzim.

Hiwi. German designation for Russian volunteers in German armed
forces during World War II; acronym for Hilfswillige.

Industrial Academy. A Moscow school that served as training ground
of industrial managers in late 1920‘s and early 1930‘s.

Industrial Party, See Promparty.

Informburo. See Sovinformburo.

Ingush. Ethnic group of Northern Caucasus; exiled by Stalin in 1944
on charges of collaboration with Germans.

Isolator. (1) Type of political prison established in early stage of
Soviet regime for fractious Bolsheviks and other political foes.
(2) In a labor camp, the designation for a building with punishment
cells.

Kalmyks. Ethnic group of Northern Caucasus; exiled by Stalin in
1943 on charges of collaboration with German forces.

KGB. Acronym for Soviet secret police after 1953; stands for State
Security Committee.

Khalkhin—Gol. River on border between China and Mongolia. Scene
of Soviet—Japanese military clashes in 1939.
