424 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

trade in flour, he released flour from the warehouse continuously
and proceeded to order more from the provincial center. Without
selling black bread in the district center, he gave the district black
bread. Yes, he did not violate the letter of the instructions, but
he violated their spirit—for their essence was to compel a reduc—
tion in flour consumption by starving the people. And so, of
course, there were good grounds for crificizing him at the Dis—
trict Party Committee.

After that criticism he remained free overnight and was ar—
rested the next morning. He was a tough little bantam rooster.
He was short, and he always carried his head slightly thrown back,
with a touch of aggressiveness. He tried to avoid surrendering his
Party membership card, because no decision expelling him from
the Party had been reached at the District Party Committee the
night before. He also refused to give up his identification card as
a deputy of the district soviet, since he had been elected by the
people, and the District Executive Committee had not taken any
decision depriving him of his deputy‘s immunity. But the police
did not appreciate such formalities and overpowered him, and
took them away by main force. They took him from the District
Consumer Cooperative down the main street of Kady in broad
daylight, and his young merchandise manager, a Komsomol mem—
ber, saw him from the window of the District Party Committee
headquarters. At that time not everyone, especially in the villages,
because of their naiveté, had learned to keep quiet about what
they thought. The merchandise manager shouted: "Look at those
bastards! Now they‘ve taken away my boss too!" Right then and
there, without leaving the room, they expelled him from both the
District Party Committee and from the Komsomol, and he slid
down the well—known pathway into the bottomless pit.

Vlasov was arrested very late in comparison with the others
who were charged in the same case. The case had been nearly
completed without him, and it was in process of being set up as
an open trial. They took him to the Ivanovo NKVD Internal
Prison, but, since he was the last to be involved, he was not sub—
jected to any heavy pressure. He was interrogated twice. There
was no supporting testimony from witnesses. And the file of his
interrogation was filled with summary reports of the District Con—
sumer Cooperative and clips from the district newspaper. Vlasov
