First Cell, First Love | 187

One night of undisturbed sleep was more important than all
the fates on earth!

One more thing held me back, which I didn‘t quite catch right
away but had felt nonetheless from the first words of my story,
although I could not at this early date find a name for it: As
each of us had been arrested, everything in our world had
switched places, a 180—degree shift in all our concepts had oc—
curred, and the good news I had begun to recount with such
enthusiasm might not be good news for us at all.

My cellmates turned on their sides, covered their eyes with
their handkerchiefs to keep out the light from the 200—watt bulb,
wound towels around their upper arms, which were chilled from
lying on top of the blankets, hid their lower arms furtively
beneath them, and went to sleep.

And 1 lay there, filled to the brim with the joy of being among
them. One hour ago I could not have counted on being with
anyone. I could have come to my end with a bullet in the back
of my head—which was what the interrogator kept promising
me—without having seen anyone at all. Interrogation still hung
over me, but how far it had retreated! Tomorrow I would be
telling them my story (though not talking about my case, of
course) and they would be telling me their stories too. How
interesting tomorrow would be, one of the best days of my life!
(Thus, very early and very clearly, I had this consciousness that
prison was not an abyss for me, but the most important turning
point in my life.)

Every detail of the cell interested me. Sleep fled, and when
the peephole was not in use I studied it all furtively. Up there
at the top of one wall was a small indentation the length of
three bricks, covered by a dark—blue paper blind. They had al—
ready told me it was a window. Yes, there was a window in the
cell. And the blind served as an air—raid blackout. Tomorrow
there would be weak daylight, and in the middle of the day they
would turn off the glaring light bulb. How much that meant—to
have daylight in daytime!

There was also a table in the cell. On it, in the most con—
spicuous spot, were a teapot, a chess set, and a small pile of
books. (I was not yet aware why they were so conspicuously
positioned. It turned out to be another example of the Lubyanka
