The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 53

But it so happened that they often had no gold. They had put
their money into real estate or securities, which had melted away
or been taken away in the Revolution, and nothing remained.
They had high hopes, of course, in arresting dental technicians,
jewelers, and watch repairmen. Through denunciations, one could
learn about gold in the most unexpected places: a veteran lathe
worker had somewhere gotten hold of, and held on to, sixty gold
five—ruble pieces from Tsarist times. The famous Siberian partisan
Muravyev had come to Odessa, bringing with him a small bag
full of gold. The Petersburg Tatar draymen all had gold hidden
away. Whether or not these things were so could be discovered
only inside prison walls. Nothing—neither proletarian origin nor
revolutionary services—served as a defense against a gold de—
nunciation. All were arrested, all were crammed into GPU cells
in numbers no one had considered possible up to then—but that
was all to the good: they would cough it up all the sooner! It
even reached a point of such confusion that men and women were
imprisoned in the same cells and used the latrine bucket in each
other‘s presence—who cared about those niceties? Give up your
gold, vipers! The interrogators did not write up charge sheets be—
cause no one needed their papers. And whether or not a sentence
would be pasted on was of very little interest. Only one thing
was important: Give up your gold, viper! The state needs gold:
and you don‘t. The interrogators had neither voice nor strength
left to threaten and torture; they had one universal method: feed
the prisoners nothing but salty food and give them no water.
Whoever coughed up gold got water! One gold piece for a cup
of fresh water!

People perish for cold metal.

This wave was distinguished from those that preceded and
followed it because, even though fewer than half —its victims held
their fate in their own hands, some did. If you in fact had no
gold, then your situation was hopeless. You would be beaten,
burned, tortured, and steamed to the point of death or until they
finally came to believe you. But if you had gold, you could deter—
mine the extent of your torture, the limits of your endurance,
and your own fate. Psychologically, this situation was, inciden—
tally, not easier but more difficult, because if you made an error
