48 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

trial of the famine organizers—and how could it not succeed when
everyone was starving in bounteous Russia, and everyone was
always looking about and asking: "Where did all our dear bread
get to?" Therefore, before the court verdict, the workers and
employees wrathfully voted for the death penalty for the scoun—
drels on trial. And by the time of the Promparty trial, there were
universal meetings and demonstrations (including even school—
children). It was the newspaper march of millions, and the roar
rose outside the windows of the courtroom: "Death! Death!
Death!"

At this turning point in our history, there were some lonely
voices of protest or abstention—and very, very great bravery was
required to say "No!" in the midst of that roaring chorus of ap—
proval. It is incomparably easier today! (Yet even today people
don‘t very often vote "against.") To the extent that we know about
them, it was those same spineless, slushy intellectuals. At the
meeting of the Leningrad Polytechnic Institute, Professor Dmitri
Apollinaryevich Rozhansky abstained (he was an enemy of cap—
ital punishment in general, you see; in the language of science,
you see, this was an frreversible process), and he was arrested
then and there! The student Dima Olitsky abstained and was ar—
rested then and there! Thus all these protests were silenced at the
very source.

So far as we know, the gray—mustached working class approved
these executions. So far as we know, from the blazing Komsomols
right up to the Party leaders and the legendary army commanders,
the entire vanguard waxed unanimous in approving these execu—
tions. Famous revolutionaries, theoreticians, and prophets, seven
years before their own inglorious destruction, welcomed the roar
of the crowd, not guessing then that their own time stood on the
threshold, that soon their own names would be dragged down in
that roar of "Scum!" "Filth!"

In fact, for the engineers the rout soon came to an end. At the
beginning of 1931 TIosif Vissarionovich spake his "Six Condi—
tions" for construction. And His Autocracy vouchsafed as the fifth
condition: We must move from a policy of destruction of the old
technical intelligentsia to a policy of concern for it, of making
use of it.

Concern for it! What had happened in the meantime to our just
