606 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

sentencing (and that was the right time to do it too!l—it was a
good time for prayer!), took us up to the second floor (and the
third floor was also partitioned off), and from the octagonal
vestibule distributed us among different cells Mine was the
southeast cell.

This was a large square cell in which, at the time, two hun—
dred prisoners were confined. They were sleeping, as they did
everywhere else there, on the bunks (and they were one—story
bunks), under the bunks, and just simply on the tile floor, out in
the aisles. Not only were the "muzzles" on the windows second—
rate; everything else, too, was in a style appropriate not to true
sons of Butyrki but to its stepsons. No books, no chess sets, no
checkers were distributed to this swarming mass, and the dented
aluminum bowls and beat—up wooden spoons were collected and
removed from one mealtime to another for fear that in the rush
they might get carried off on prisoner transports. They were even
stingy with mugs for the stepsons. They washed the bowls after
the gruel, and then the prisoners had to lap up their tea slops
out of them. The absence of one‘s own dishes was particularly
acute for those who experienced the mixed blessing of receiving
a parcel from their families (despite their meager means, relatives
made a special effort to provide parcels in those last days before
the prisoner transports left). The families had had no prison ed—
ucation themselves, and they never got any good advice in the
prison reception office either. And therefore they didn‘t send
plastic dishes, the one and only kind prisoners were allowed to
have, but glass or metal ones instead. All these honeys, jams,
condensed milks were pitilessly poured and scraped out of their
cans through the swill trough in the cell door into whatever the
prisoner had, and in the church cells he had nothing at all, which
meant that he simply got it in the palms of his hands, in his
mouth, in his handkerchief, in the flaps of his coat—which was
quite normal in Gulag terms, but not in the center of Moscow!
And at the same time the jailer kept hurrying him as if he were
late for his train. (The jailer hurried him because he was counting
on licking out whatever was left in the jars.) Everything was
temporary in the church cells, without that illusion of permanency
which existed in the interrogation cells and in the cells where
prisoners awaited sentencing. Ground meat, a semiprocessed
