The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 79

In essence, the exile of the Germans was similar to the dis—
possession of the kulaks. But it was less harsh, since the Germans
were allowed to take more of their possessions with them and
were not sent off to such fatal, deadly areas. As had been the case
with the kulaks, the German exile had no juridical basis. The
Criminal Code in itself was one thing, and the exile of hundreds of
thousands of people was something else entirely. It was the per—
sonal edict of a monarch. In addition, this was his first experiment
of the sort with an entire nationality, and he found it extremely
interesting from a theoretical point of view.

By the end of the summer of 1941, becoming bigger in the
autumn, the wave of the encircled was surging in. These were
the defenders of their native land, the very same warriors whom
the cities had seen off to the front with bouquets and bands a few
months before, who had then sustained the heaviest tank assaults
of the Germans, and in the general chaos, and through no fault
of their own, had spent a certain time as isolated units not in
enemy imprisonment, not at all, but in temporary encirclement,
and later had broken out. And instead of being given a brotherly
embrace on their return, such as every other army in the world
would have given them, instead of being given a chance to rest
up, to visit their families, and then return to their units—they
were held on suspicion, disarmed, deprived of all rights, and
taken away in groups to identification points and screening centers
where officers of the Special Branches started interrogating them,
distrusting not only their every word but their very identity.
Identification consisted of cross—questioning, confrontations, pit—
ting the evidence of one against another. Afterward, some of
those who had been encircled were restored to their former names,
ranks, and responsibilities and went off to military units. Others,
fewer in number at the start, constituted the first wave of traitors
of the Motherland under 58—1b. But at first, until the standard
penalty was finally determined, they got less than ten years.

That was how the active army was kept purged. But there was
also an enormous inactive army in the Far East and in Mongolia,

 

no chance to prove he was not. So he was exiled. "Is this your real name?
What assignments were you given by the Fascist intelligence service?" Then
there was that native of Tambov whose real name was Kaverznev, and who
changed it to Kolbe in 1918. At what point did he share Okorokov‘s fate?
