398 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

thing for these strange defendants right at that moment, on the
threshold of death, was to convince the people and the whole
world of the infallibility and farsightedness of the Soviet govern—
ment. Ramzin, in particular, glorified the "revolutionary con—
sciousness of the proletarian masses and their leaders," who had
been "able to find immeasurably more dependable paths of
economic policy" than the scientists, and who had calculated the
tempos of economic growth rate far more correctly. And then:
"I had come to understand it was necessary to make a jump
ahead, and that it was necessary to make a leap forward,"" that
it was necessary to capture by storm," etc., etc. And Larichev
declared: "The Soviet Union is invincible against the weakening
capitalist world." And Kalinnikov: "The dictatorship of the pro—
letariat is an inevitable necessity." And further:; "The interests
of the people and the interests of the Soviet government merge
into one purposeful whole." Yes, and in addition, in the country—
side "the general line of the Party, the destruction of the kulaks,
is correct." They had time, while awaiting execution, to deliver
themselves of judgments about everything. And the repenting
intellectuals even had enough voice for such a prophecy as this:
"In proportion to the development of society, individual life is
going to become more circumscribed. . . . Collective will is the
highest form."**

Thus it was that with eight—horse traction all the goals of the
trial were attained:

1. All the shortages in the country, including famine, cold,
lack of clothing, chaos, and obvious stupidities, were blamed on
the engineer—wreckers.

2. The people were terrified by the threat of imminent inter—
vention from abroad and therefore prepared for new sacrifices.

3. Leftist circles in the West were warned of the intrigues of
their governments.

4. The solidarity of the engineers was destroyed; all the in—
telligentsia was given a good scare and left divided within itself.
And so that there should be no doubt about it, this purpose of
the trial was once more clearly proclaimed by Ramzin:

27. Protsess Prompartii, p. 504. And that is how they were talking here in
the Soviet Union, in our own country, in 1930, when Mao Tse—tung was still

a stripling.
28. Ibid., p. 510.
