The Ships of the Archipelago | 509

with Merezhkov‘s support, proclaimed himself the monitor of
the compartment and, through a convoy guard, requested a
meeting with their chief. (He had fathomed that haughtiness and
its need of a pimp!) This was unhéard of, but Sanin was sum—
moned, and they had a chat somewhere. Following Sanin‘s ex—
ample, someone in the second compartment also asked for a
meeting. And that person was similarly received.

And the next morning they issued not twenty ounces of bread
—the prisoner—transport ration at the time—but no more than
nine ounces.

They gave out the ration, and a quiet murmur began. A mur—
mur, but in fear of any "collective action," these politicals did not
speak up. In the event, only one among them loudly asked the
guard distributing the bread: "Citizen chief! How much does this
ration weigh?"

"The correct weight," he was told.

"I demand a reweighing; otherwise I will not accept it!" the
dissatisfied prisoner declared loudly.

The whole car fell silent. Many waited before beginning to eat
their ration; expecting that theirs, too, would be reweighed. And
at that moment, in all his spotlessness, the officer appeared.
Everyone fell silent, which made his words all the weightier and
all the more irresistible.

"Which one here spoke out against the Soviet government?"

All hearts stopped beating. (People will protest that this is a
universal approach, that even out in freedom every little chief
declares himself to be the Soviet government, and just try to argue
with him about it. But for those who are panicky, who have just
been sentenced for anti—Soviet propaganda, the threat is more
frightening.)

"Who was starting a mutiny over the bread ration?" the officer
demanded.

"Citizen lieutenant, I only wanted . . ." The guilty rebel was
already trying to explain it all away.

"Aha, you‘re the bastard? You‘re the one who doesn‘t like the
Soviet government?"

(And why rebel? Why argue? Wasn‘t it really easier to eat
that little underweight ration, to suffer it in silence? And now he
had fallen right in it!)
