The Law Matures | 395

Well, how true! How psychological! If you ever served time
in that institution, just recollect: what else was there to do?

(Ivanov—Razumnik wrote" that in 1938 he was imprisoned in
the same cell in the Butyrki as Krylenko, and that Krylenko‘s
place in the cell was under the board bunks. I can picture that
vividly—since I have crawled there myself. The bunks were so
low that the only way one could crawl along the dirty asphalt
floor was flat on one‘s stomach, but newcomers could never
adapt and would try to crawl on all fours. They would manage
to get their heads under, but their rear ends would be left stick—
ing out. And it is my opinion that the supreme prosecutor had a
particularly difficult time adapting, and I imagine that his rear
end, not yet grown thin, used to stick out there for the greater
glory of Soviet justice. Sinful person that I am, I visualize with
malice that rear end sticking out there, and through the whole
long description of these trials it somehow gives me solace.)

Yes, the prosecutor expounded, continuing along the same
line, if all this about tortures was true, then it was impossible to
understand what could have induced all the defendants to con—
fess, unanimously and in chorus, without any arguments and
deviations. Just where could such colossal collusion have been
carried out? After all, they had no chance to communicate with
each other during the interrogation period.

(Several pages further along, a witness who survived will tell
us where.)

Now it is not for me to tell the reader but for the reader to
tell me just what the notorious "riddle of the Moscow trials of
the thirties" consisted of. At first people were astounded at the
Promparty trial, and then that riddle was transferred to the trials
of the Party leaders.

After all, they didn‘t put on trial in open court the two
thousand who had been dragged into it, or even two or three
hundred, but only eight people. It is not as hard as all that to
direct a chorus of eight. And as for his choices, Krylenko was
free to choose from thousands over a period of two years. Pal—
chinsky had not been broken, but had been shot—and posthum—
ously named "the leader of the Promparty," which is what he
was called in the testimony, even though no word of his survived.

25. Ivanov—Razumnik, Tyurmy i Ssylki (Prisons and Exiles), New York,
Chekhov Publishing House, 1953.
