30 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

a decree of the Defense Council of February 15, 1919—appar—
ently with Lenin in the chair—the Cheka and the NKVD were
ordered to take hostage peasants from those localities where the
removal of snow from railroad tracks "was not proceeding satis—
factorily," and "if the snow removal did not take place they were
to be shot."" (At the end of 1920, by decree of the Council of
People‘s Commissars, permission was given to take Social Demo—
crats as hostages too.)

But even restricting ourselves to ordinary arrests, we can note
that by the spring of 1918 a torrent of socialist traitors had
already begun that was to continue without slackening for many
years. All these parties—the SR‘s, the Mensheviks, the An—
archists, the Popular Socialists—had for decades only pretended
to be revolutionaries; they had worn socialism only as a mask,
and for that they went to hard labor, still pretending. Only dur—
ing the violent course of the Revolution was the bourgeois
essence of these socialist traitors discovered. What could be more
natural than to begin arresting them! Soon after the outlawing
of the Cadets, the dispersal of the Constituent Assembly, the dis—
arming of the Preobrazhensky and other regiments, they began
in a small way to arrest, quietly at first, both SR‘s and Men—
sheviks. After June 14, 1918, the day members of these parties
were excluded from all the soviets, the arrests proceeded in a
more intensive and more coordinated fashion. From July 6 on,
they began to deal with the Left SR‘s in the same way, though
the Left SR‘s had been cleverer and had gone on pretending
longer that they were allies of the one and only consistent party
of the proletariat. From then on, it was enough for a workers‘
protest, a disturbance, a strike, to occur at any factory or in any
little town (and there were many of them in the summer of 1918;
and in March, 1921, they shook Petrograd, Moscow, and then
Kronstadt and forced the inauguration of the NEP), and——
coinciding with concessions, assurances, and the satisfaction for
the just demands of the workers—the Cheka began silently to
pick up Mensheviks and SR‘s at night as being the people truly
to blame for these disorders. In the summer of 1918 and in
April and October of 1919, they jailed Anarchists right and

7. Dekrety Sovetskoi Vlasti (Decrees of the Soviet Regime), Vol. 4, Moscow,
1968, p. 627.
