From Island to Island | 591

dor and don‘t wipe their feet; and how someone is in someone
else‘s way at the office; and how someone has been offered a good
job but can‘t make up his mind to move—how can he move bag
and baggage, is that so easy? You listen to all this, and the goose
pimples of rejection run up and down your spine: to you the
true measure of things in the Universe is so clear! The measure
of all weaknesses and all passions! And these sinners aren‘t fated
to perceive it. The only one there who is alive, truly alive, is
incorporeal you, and all these others are simply mistaken in
thinking themselves alive.

And an unbridgeable chasm divides you! You cannot cry out
to them, nor weep over them, nor shake them by the shoulder:
after all, you are a disembodied spirit, you are a ghost, and they
are material bodies.

And how can you bring it home to them? By an inspiration?
By a vision? A dream? Brothers! People! Why has life been given
you? In the deep, deaf stillness of midnight, the doors of the
death cells are being swung open—and great—souled people are
being dragged out to be shot. On all the railroads of the country
this very minute, right now, people who have just been fed salt
herring are licking their dry lips with bitter tongues. They dream
of the happiness of stretching out one‘s legs and of the relief
one feels after going to the toilet. In Orotukan the earth thaws
only in summer and only to the depth of three feet—and only then
can they bury the bones of those who died during the winter.
And you have the right to arrange your own life under the blue
sky and the hot sun, to get a drink of water, to stretch, to travel
wherever you like without a convoy. So what‘s this about unwiped
feet? And what‘s this about a mother—in—law? What about the
main thing in life, all its riddles? If you want, I‘ll spell it out for
you right now. Do not pursue what is illusory—property and posi—
tion: all that is gained at the expense of your nerves decade after
decade, and is confiscated in one fell night. Live with a steady
superiority over life—don‘t be afraid of misfortune, and do not
yearn after happiness; it is, after all, all the same: the bitter
doesn‘t last forever, and the sweet never fills the cup to over—
flowing. It is enough if you don‘t freeze in the cold and if thirst
and hunger don‘t claw at your insides. If your back isn‘t broken,
if your feet can walk, if both arms can bend, if both eyes see,
