190 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

political prison, and I was grateful that I had been sent here: I
thought about Bukharin a great deal and I wanted to picture the
whole thing as it had actually been. However, I had the impres—
sion that we were by now merely the remnants, and that in this
respect we might just as well have been in any provincial
"internal" prison.‘ Still, there was a good deal of status in being
here.

And there was no reason to be bored with my companions in
my new cell. They were people to listen to and people with whom
to compare notes.

The old fellow with the lively eyebrows—and at sixty—three
he in no way bore himself like an old man—was Anatoly Ilyich
Fastenko. He was a big asset to our Lubyanka cell—both as a
keeper of the old Russian prison traditions and as a living history
of Russian revolutions. Thanks to all that he remembered, he
somehow managed to put in perspective everything that had
taken place in the past and everything that was taking place in
the present. Such people are valuable not only in a cell. We
badly need them in our society as a whole.

Right there in our cell we read Fastenko‘s name in a book
about the 1905 Revolution. He had been a Social Democrat for
such a long, long time that in the end, it seemed, he had ceased to
be one.

He had been sentenced to his first prison term in 1904 while
still a young man, but he had been freed outright under the
"manifesto" proclaimed on October 17, 1905.°

His story about that amnesty was interesting. In those years,

7. One attached to a State Security headquarters.

8. Who among us has not learned by heart from our school history courses,
as well as from the Short Course in the history of the Soviet Communist Party,
that this "provocative and foul manifesto" was a mockery of freedom, that the
Tsar had proclaimed: "Freedom for the dead, and prison for the living"? But
the epigram was bogus. The manifesto declared that all political parties were
to be tolerated and that a State Duma was to be convened, and it provided for
an amnesty which was honest and extremely extensive. (The fact that it had
been issued under duress was something else again.) Indeed, under its terms
none other than all political prisoners without exception were to be released
without reference to the term and type of punishment they had been sentenced
to. Only criminals remained imprisoned. The Stalin amnesty of July 7, 1945—
true, it was not issued under duress—was exactly the opposite. All the political
prisoners remained imprisoned.
