572 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

—twenty—five instead of forty—and promptly ordered: "Come on,
come on, faster, faster. We have other cars to feed too, not just
you." How then could you eat, how could you divide it up? You
couldn‘t dish it out equitably on the basis of bowls, and that
meant you had to estimate each portion so as not to give out too
much. And those to be served first would shout: "Stir it! Stir it!"
And the last kept silent: there would be more on the bottom. The
first were eating and the last waiting. They would have liked the
others to eat faster, because they were hungry, and meanwhile the
gruel would be getting cold in the barrel and they were also
being hurried from outside: "Well, have you finished? Come on
now, get a move on!" And then they served the second contingent
—not more and not less and not thicker and not thinner than the
first. And then came estimating the leftovers correctly and pour—
ing them out two portions to a bowl. And all this time forty
people don‘t so much eat as watch the sharing out and suffer.
They don‘t heat the car, they don‘t protect the other prisoners
from the thieves, they don‘t give you enough to drink, and they
don‘t give you enough to eat—but on the other hand they don‘t
let you sleep either. During the day the convoy can see the whole
train very clearly and the tracks behind them, and can be sure
that no one has jumped out the side or slipped down on the rails.
But at night vigilance possesses them. With long—handled wooden
mallets (the standard Gulag equipment) they knock resoundingly
on every board of the car at every stop: maybe someone has
sawed through it. And at certain stops the door of the car is
thrown open. The light of the lantern or the beam of the search—
light: "Checkup!" And this means: Get on your feet and be
ready to go where they tell you—everyone run to the left or to
the right. The convoy guards jump inside with their mallets
(others have ranged themselves in a semicircle outside with auto—
matic pistols), and they point: to the left! That means that those
on the left are in place and those on the right must get over there
on the jump like fleas hopping over each other and landing where
they can. And whoever isn‘t nimble, whoever gets caught day—
dreaming, gets whacked on the ribs and back with the mallets to _
give him more energy. And by this time the convoy jackboots are
already trampling your pauper‘s pallet and all your lousy duds
are being thrown in every direction and everywhere there are
