Tyurzak | 467

Should we, too, perhaps try to publish one like it?) In 1914,
after only five days of a hunger strike—admittedly, without water
—Dzerzhinsky and four of his comrades obtained all their nu—
merous demands (which had to do with living conditions).‘*

In those years, there were no dangers or difficulties for the
prisoner beyond the torments of hunger. They could not beat
him up for going on a hunger strike, nor sentence him to a second
term, nor increase his term, nor shoot him, nor send him off on
a prisoner transport. (All this was to come later on.)

In the Revolution of 1905 and the years following it, the
prisoners felt themselves to be masters of the prison to such an
extent that they did not even go to the trouble of declaring a
hunger strike; they simply destroyed prison property (so—called
"obstructions"), or went so far as to declare a strike, although it
might seem that for prisoners this would have hardly any mean—
ing. Thus in the city of Nikolayev in 1906, 197 prisoners in the
local prison declared a "strike" in conjunction with people outside.
Outside the prison, leaflets in support of their strike were pub—
lished and daily meetings assembled in front of the prison. These
meetings (and it goes without saying that the prisoners were at
the windows, which had, of course, no "muzzles") forced the
administration to accept the demands of the "striking" prisoners.
After this, some people on the street and others behind the bars
joined in singing revolutionary songs. And things went on that
way for eight days. (And nobody stopped them! It was, after all,
a year of postrevolutionary repression.) On the ninth day all the
demands of the prisoners were satisfied! Similar incidents oc—
curred at the time in Odessa, in Kherson, and in Yelizavetgrad.
That‘s how easily victory was attained then.

It would be interesting, incidentally, to compare the effective—
ness of hunger strikes under the Provisional Government, but
those few Bolsheviks imprisoned from the July days until the
Kornilov episode (Kamenev, Trotsky, and Raskolnikov for a
while longer) evidently had no reason to go on a hunger strike.

In the twenties, the lively picture of hunger strikes grows
clouded (though that depends, of course, on the point of
view . . .). This widely known weapon, which had justified itself
so gloriously, was, of course, taken over not only by recognized

12. Ibid.
