From Island to Island | 589

very morning and will be in camp the next day? And he im—
mediately went out to watch the chickens scratching around in
the station master‘s garden and the peasant women getting ready
to leave the station with their unsold butter and melons. He
moved three, four, five steps to the side and no one shouted
"Halt!" at him. With unbelieving fingers he touched the leaves of
the acacias and almost wept.

And the special convoy is precisely that sort of miracle from
beginning to end. You won‘t see the common prisoner transports
this time. You don‘t have to keep your hands behind your back.
You don‘t have to undress down to your skin, nor sit on the
earth on your rear end, and there won‘t be any search at all. Your
convoy guards approach you in a friendly way and even address
you politely. They warn you, as a general precaution, that in case
of any attempt to escape—We do, as usual, shoot. Our pistols
are loaded and we have them in our pockets. However, let‘s go
simply. Act natural. Don‘t let everyone see that you‘re a prisoner.
(And I urge you to note how here, too, as always, the interests
of the individual and the interests of the state coincide com—
pletely.)

My camp life was totally transformed the day I went out to
line up forlornly in the carpenters‘ brigade, my fingers cramped
(they had gotten stiff holding onto tools and wouldn‘t straighten
out), and the work—assignment supervisor took me aside and with
unexpected respect said to me: "Do you know that on orders
of the Minister of Internal Affairs . . . ?"

I was stupefied. The line—up dispersed and the trusties in the
camp compound surrounded me. Some of them said: "They are
going to hang a new stretch on you." And others said: "To be
released." But everyone agreed on one thing—that there was
no escaping Minister of Internal Affairs Kruglov. And I, too,
swayed between a new term and being released. I had quite for—
gotten that half a year before, some character had come to our
camp and distributed Gulag registration cards. (After the war
they had begun this registration in all the nearby camps, but it
seems unlikely that it was ever completed.) The most important
question on it was: "Trade or Profession." And the zeks would
fill in the most precious Gulag trades to enhance their own value:
"barber," "tailor," "storekeeper," "baker." As for me, I had
