That Spring | 245

only postponed your full reckoning with the military tribunal;
also, it made you still more dangerous. You could have acquired
a very harmful spirit through living freely among Europeans. And
if you had not been afraid to escape and continue to fight, it
meant you were a determined person and thus doubly dangerous
in the Motherland.

Did you survive POW camp at the expense of your com—
patriots and comrades? Did you become a member of the camp
Polizei, or a commandant, a helper of the Germans and of death?
Stalinist law did not punish you any more severely than if you
had operated with the Resistance forces. It was the same article
of the Code and the same term—and one could guess why too.
Such a person was less dangerous. But the inert law that is in—
explicably implanted in us forbade this path to all except the
dregs.

In addition to those four possibilities—either impossible or un—
acceptable—there was a fifth: to wait for German recruiters, to
see what they would summon you to.

Sometimes, fortunately, representatives came from German
rural districts to select hired men for their farmers. Sometimes
they came from corporations and picked out engineers and
mechanics. According to the supreme Stalinist imperative you
should have rejected that too. You should have concealed the fact
that you were an engineer. You should have concealed the fact
that you were a skilled worker. As an industrial designer or
electrician, you could have preserved your patriotic purity only
if you had stayed in the POW camp to dig in the earth, to rot, to
pick through the garbage heap. In that case, for pure treason to
the Motherland, you could count on getting, your head raised
high in pride, ten years in prison and five more "muzzled."
Whereas for treason to the Motherland aggravated by working for
the enemy, especially in one‘s own profession, you got, with
bowed head, the same ten years in prison and five more muzzled.

And that was the jeweler‘s precision of a behemoth—Stalin‘s
trademark.

Now and then recruiters turned up who were of quite a dif—
ferent stripe—Russians, usually recent Communist political com—
missars. White Guards didn‘t accept that type of employment.
These recruiters scheduled a meeting in the camp, condemned the
