First Cell, First Love | 203

to shout: "Time to get up!"), we jumped up without lingering,
made our beds, and sat down on them feeling empty and helpless,
with the electric light still burning. This enforced wakefulness
from 6 a.M. on—at a time when the brain was still lazy from
sleep, the whole world seemed repulsive and all of life wrecked,
and there was not a gulp of air in the cell—was particularly
ludicrous for those who had been under interrogation all night
and had only just been able to get to sleep. But don‘t try to steal
extra sleep! If you should try to doze off, leaning slightly against
the wall, or propped over the table as if studying the chessboard,
or relaxing over a book lying conspicuously open on your knees,
the key would sound a warning knock on the door, or, worse yet,
the door with that rattling lock would suddenly open silently,
since the Lubyanka jailers were specially trained to do just that,
and like a spirit passing through a wall, the swift and silent
shadow of the junior sergeant would take three steps into the
cell, hook onto you as you slept, and maybe take you off to
the punishment cell; or maybe they would take book privileges
away from the whole cell or deprive everyone of their daily walk
—a cruel, unjust punishment for all, and there were other punish—
ments, too, in the black lines of the prison regulations. Read
them! They hang in every cell. If, incidentally, you needed
glasses to read, then you wouldn‘t be reading books or the
sacred regulations either during those two starving hours. Eye—
glasses were taken away every night, and it was evidently still
"dangerous" for you to have them during those two hours when
no one brought anything to the cell, and no one came to it. No
one asked about anything, and no one was summoned—the inter—
rogators were still sleeping sweetly. And the prison administra—
tion was just opening its eyes, coming to. Only the vertukhai,
the turnkeys, were active and energetic, opening the peephole
cover once a minute for inspection."

But one procedure was carried out during those two hours: the
morning trip to the toilet. When the guard roused us, he made
an important announcement. He designated the person from our

14. During my time this word "vertukhai" had already come into wide
currency for the jailers. It was said to have originated with Ukrainian guards
who were always ordering: "Stoi, ta ne vertukhais!" And yet it is also worth
recalling the English word for jailer, "turnkey," is "verti klyuch" in Russian.
Perhaps a "vertukhai" here in Russia is also "one who turns the key."
