The Law Matures | 377

trial they produced only a few newspaper articles, published in
the émigré press and our own. But in that event how could the
prosecution present its case? Well, to be sure, there was Nikolai
Vasilyevich Krylenko. And, to be sure, it wasn‘t the first time
either. "The best evidence, no matter what the circumstances, is
the confessions of the defendants."*

But what confessions! These confessions were not forced but
inspired—repentance tearing whole monologues from the breast,
and talk, talk, and more talk, and self—exposure and self—flagella—
tion! They told old man Fedotov, who was sixty—six, that he could
sit down, that he had talked long enough, but no, he kept pouring
out additional explanations and interpretations. For five sessions
in a row, no questions were asked. The defendants kept talking
and talking and explaining and kept asking for the floor again
in order to supply whatever they had left out. They presented
inferentially everything the prosecution needed without any ques—
tions whatever being asked. Ramzin, after extensive explanations,
went on to provide brief résumés, for the sake of clarity, as if he
were addressing slow—witted students. The defendants were afraid
most of all that something might be left unexplained, that some—
one might go unexposed, that someone‘s name might go un—
mentioned, that someone‘s intention to wreck might not have
been made clear. And how they reviled themselves! "I am a class
enemy!" "I was bribed." "Our bourgeois ideology." And then
the prosecutor: "Was that your error?" And Charnovsky replied:
"And crime!" There was simply nothing for Krylenko to do.
For five sessions he went on drinking tea and eating cookies or
whatever else they brought him.

But how did the defendants sustain such an emotional ex—
plosion? There was no tape recorder to take down their words,
but Otsep, the defense attorney, described them: "The defend—
ants‘ words flowed in a businesslike manner, cold and profession—
ally calm." There you are! Such a passion for confession—and
businesslike at the same time? Cold? More than that: they appear
to have mumbled their glib repentance so listlessly that Vyshinsky
often asked them to speak louder, more clearly, because they
couldn‘t be heard.

The harmony of the trial was not at all disturbed by the de—

8. Ibid., p. 452.
