The Bluecaps | 165

piece suit, a black overcoat, and black hat. He was over fifty,
tall, well groomed, and his white face had been nurtured on
gentleman‘s food.

I completed the fourth pair, and the Tatar sergeant, chief
of the convoy, gestured to me to pick up my sealed suitcase,
which stood off to one side. It contained my officer‘s equipment
as well as all the papers which had been seized as evidence when
I was arrested.

What did he mean, carry my suitcase? He, a sergeant, wanted
me, an officer, to pick up my suitcase and carry it? A large, heavy
object? Despite the new regulations? While beside me six men
from the ranks would be marching empty—handed? And one
representative of a conquered nation?

I did not express this whole complex set of ideas to the
sergeant. I merely said: "I am an officer. Let the German carry
it."

None of the prisoners turned around at my words: turning
around was forbidden. Only my mate in the fourth pair, also an
"SU," looked at me in astonishment. (When he had been cap—
tured, our army wasn‘t yet like that.)

But the sergeant from counterintelligence was not surprised.
Even though I was not, of course, an officer in his eyes, still his _
indoctrination and mine coincided. He summoned the innocent
German and ordered him to carry the suitcase. It was just as
well the latter had not understood our conversation.

The rest of us put our hands behind our backs. The former
POW‘s did not have even one bag among them. They had left the
Motherland with empty hands and that is exactly how they re—
turned to her. So our column marched off, four pairs in file. We
did not converse with our convoy. And it was absolutely forbid—
den to talk among ourselves whether on the march, during a halt,
or at overnight stops. As accused prisoners we were required to
move as though separated by invisible partitions, as though suf—
focated, each in his own solitary—confinement cell.

The early spring weather was changeable. At times a thin
mist hung in the air, and even on the firm highway the liquid mud
squelched dismally beneath our boots. At times the heavens
cleared and the soft yellow sun, still uncertain of its talent,
warmed the already thawing hillocks and showed us with perfect
