The Law Matures | 381

He tries softly to explain to the hardheaded prosecutor: "Theoreti—
cal approaches of every kind project norms which in the final analysis
are [they will be considered to be} wrecking. . . .""

Well, tell me now: how much more clearly could a frightened de—
fendant speak out? What is theory to us is wrecking to you! Because
you are compelled to grab today, without any thought for tomorrow.

Old Fedotov tries to explain where thousands and millions of rubles
are lost in the insane rush of the Five—Year Plan: Cotton is not sorted
where it is grown so that every factory can be sent that grade and kind
of cotton it requires; instead, it is shipped any old way, all mixed up.
But the prosecutor doesn‘t listen to him. With the stubbornness of a
block of stone he keeps coming back again and again—ten times—
to the more obvious question he has put together out of children‘s
building blocks: Why did they begin to build the so—called "factory—
palaces," with high ceilings, broad corridors, and unnecessarily good
ventilation? Was that not the most obvious sort of wrecking? After
all, that amounted to tying up capital irrevocably! The bourgeois
wreckers explain to him that the People‘s Commissariat of Labor
wanted to build factories for the workers in the land of the proletariat
which were spacious and had good air. [That means there are also
wreckers in the People‘s Commissariat of Labor. Make a note of
that!] The doctors had insisted on thirty feet of space between floors,
and Fedotov reduced it to twenty—so why not to sixteen? Now that
was wrecking! (If he had reduced it to fifteen, that would have been
flagrant wrecking: he would have wanted to create the nightmare
conditions of a capitalist factory for free Soviet workers.) They ex—
plain to Krylenko that in relation to the entire cost of the factory and
its equipment, this difference accounted for 3 percent of the total—
but no, again and again and again, he keeps on about the height of
the ceilings! And how did they dare install such powerful ventilators?
They took into account the hottest summer days. Why the hottest days?
So what! Let the workers sweat a little on the hottest days!

And in the meantime: "The disproportions were inherent. . . .
Bungling organization saw to that before there was any ‘Engineers
Center.‘" (Charnovsky.)"" "No wrecking activities were ever neces—
sary. . .. All one had to do was carry out the appropriate actions and
everything would happen on its own." (Charnovsky again.)"} He
could not have expressed himself more clearly. And he said this after
many months in the Lubyanka and from the defendants‘ bench in

11. Ibid., p. 365.
12. Ibid., p. 204.
13. Ibid., p. 202.
