70 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

independent and strong—minded man, stood with the presidium. ~
Aware of all the falsity and all the impossibility of the situation,
he still kept on applauding! Nine minutes! Ten! In anguish he
watched the secretary of the District Party Committee, but the
latter dared not stop. Insanity! To the last man! With make—
believe enthusiasm on their faces, looking at each other with
faint hope, the district leaders were just going to go on and on
applauding till they fell where they stood, till they were carried
out of the hall on stretchers! And even then those who were left
would not falter. . . . Then, after eleven minutes, the director of
the paper factory assumed a businesslike expression and sat
down in his seat. And, oh, a miracle took place! Where had the
universal, uninhibited, indescribable enthusiasm gone? To a man,
everyone else stopped dead and sat down. They had been saved!
The squirrel had been smart enough to jump off his revolving
wheel.

That, however, was how they discovered who the independent
people were. And that was how they went about eliminating
them. That same night the factory director was arrested. They
easily pasted ten years on him on the pretext of something quite
different. But after he had signed Form 206, the final document
of the interrogation, his interrogator reminded him:

"Don‘t ever be the first to stop applauding!"**

— (And just what are we supposed to do? How are we supposed
to stop?)

Now that‘s what Darwin‘s natural selection is. And that‘s also
how to grind people down with stupidity.

But today a new myth is being created. Every story of 1937
that is printed, every reminiscence that is published, relates with—
out exception the tragedy of the Communist leaders. They have
kept on assuring us, and we have unwittingly fallen for it, that
the history of 1937 and 1938 consisted chiefly of the arrests of
the big Communists—and virtually no one else. But out of the
millions arrested at that time, important Party and state officials
could not possibly have represented more than 10 percent. Most
of the selatives standing in line with food parcels outside the
Leningrad prisons were lower—class women, the sort who sold

36. Told me by N. G——ko.
