434 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

of intentions murmured in the kitchen of a communal apartment
—a period of mass strikes and peasant revolts; the period when
the parties of the future revolution were created and grew in
strength)—486 people were executed; in other words, about
seventeen people per year for the whole country. (This figure
includes executions of ordinary, nonpolitical criminals!)® During
the years of the first revolution (1905) and its suppression, the
number of executions rocketed upward, astounding Russian
imaginations, calling forth tears from Tolstoi and indignation
from Korolenko and many, many others: from 1905 through
1908 about 2,200 persons were executed—forty—five a month.
This, as Tagantsev said, was an epidemic of executions. It came
to an abrupt end.

When the Provisional Government came to power, it abolished
capital punishment entirely. In July, 1917, however, it was re—
instated in the active army and front—line areas for military
crimes, murder, rape, assault, and pillage (very widespread in
those areas at that time). This was one of the most unpopular
of the measures which destroyed the Provisional Government.
The Bolsheviks‘ slogan before the Bolshevik coup d‘état was:
"Down with capital punishment, reinstated by Kerensky!"

A story has come down to us that on the night of October
25—26 a discussion arose in Smolny as to whether one of the first
decrees shouldn‘t be the abolition of capital punishment in
perpetuity—whereupon Lenin justly ridiculed the idealism of his
comrades. He, at any rate, knew that without capital punishment
there would be no movement whatever in the direction of the
new society. However, in forming a coalition government with
the Left SR‘s, he gave in to their faulty concepts, and on October
28, 1917, capital punishment was abolished. Nothing good, of
course, could come from that "goody—goody" position. (Yes,
and how did they get rid of it? At the beginning of 1918, Trotsky
ordered that Aleksei Shchastny, a newly appointed admiral, be
brought to trial because he had refused to scuttle the Baltic
Fleet. Karklin, the Chairman of the Verkhtrib, quickly sentenced
him in broken Russian: "To be shot within twenty—four hours."
There was a stir in the hall: But it has been abolished! Prosecutor

2. Thirteen people were executed in Schliisselburg from 1884 to 1906. An
awesome total—for Switzerland perhaps!
