The Interrogation | 129

Party is not obliged to account for what it does to every single
one of us—to explain the whys and wherefores. If they ask us to,
that means we should sign."

And another orthodox Communist sidles up:

"I signed denunciations against thirty—five people, against all
my acquaintances. And I advise you too: Drag along as many
names as you can in your wake, as many as you can. That way it
will become obvious that the whole thing is an absurdity and
they‘ll let everyone out!"

But that is precisely what the Organs need. The conscientious—
ness of the orthodox Communist and the purpose of the NKVD
naturally coincide. Indeed, the NKVD needs just that arched
fan of names, that fat multiplication of them. That is the mark of
quality of their work, and these are also new patches of woods in
which to set out snares. "Your accomplices, accomplices! Others
who share your views!" That is what they keep pressing to shake
out of everyone. They say that R. Ralov named Cardinal Riche—
lieu as one of his accomplices and that the Cardinal was in fact
so listed in his depositions—and no one was astonished by this
until Ralov was questioned about it at his rehabilitation proceed—
ings in 1956. '

Apropos of the orthodox Communists, Stalin was necessary,
for such a purge as that, yes, but a Party like that was necessary
too: the majority of those in power, up to the very moment of
their own arrest, were pitiless in arresting others, obediently
destroyed their peers in accordance with those same instructions
and handed over to retribution any friend or comrade—in—arms of
yesterday. And all the big Bolsheviks, who now wear martyrs‘
halos, managed to be the executioners of other Bolsheviks (not
even taking into account how all of them in the first place had
been the executioners of non—Communists). Perhaps 1937 was
needed in order to show how little their whole ideology was worth
—that ideology of which they boasted so enthusiastically, turning
Russia upside down, destroying its foundations, trampling every—
thing it held sacred underfoot, that Russia where they themselves
had never been threatened by such retribution. The victims of
the Bolsheviks from 1918 to 1946 never conducted themselves
