306 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

In this connection, I was given by well—wishers an intact copy
of a collection of speeches for the prosecution delivered by that
fierce revolutionary, the first People‘s Commissar of Military
Affairs in the Workers‘ and Peasants‘ Government, the Com—
mander in Chief, and later the organizer of the Department of
Exceptional Courts of the People‘s Commissariat of Justice—
where the personal rank of tribune was being readied for him,
until Lenin vetoed the title**—the glorious accuser in the greatest
trials, subsequently exposed as the ferocious enemy of the people,
N. V. Krylenko." And if, despite everything, we want to at—
tempt a brief review of the public trials, if we are determined to
try to get a feeling for the judicial atmosphere of the first post—
revolutionary years, then we have to learn to read this Krylenko
text. We have no other. And using it as a basis, we must try to
picture to ourselves everything that is missing from it and every—
thing that happened in the provinces too.

Of course, we would prefer to see the stenographic record of
those trials, to listen to the dramatic voices from beyond the
grave of those first defendants and those first lawyers, speaking
at a time when no one could have foreseen in what implacable
sequence all of it would be swallowed up—together with those
Revtribunal members as well.

However, as Krylenko has explained, for a whole series of
technical reasons "it was inconvenient to publish the stenographic
records""* It was convenient only to publish his speeches for the
prosecution and the sentences handed down by the tribunals,
which by that time had already come to jibe completely with the
demands of the accuser—prosecutor.

Krylenko claims that the archives of the Moscow Revtribunal
and the Supreme Revtribunal turned out (by 1922) to be "far
from orderly. . . . In a whole series of cases the stenographic
records . . . were so incomprehensible that it was necessary either
to cross out entire pages or else to try to restore the text from
memory"! And a "series of the biggest trials"—including the trial
which followed the revolt of the Left SR‘s, and the case of Ad—

12. Lenin, fifth edition, Vol. 36, g 210.

13. Krylenko, Za Pyat Let (1918—1922). Edition 7,000 copies. Prose—
cution speeches in the most important trials held before the Moscow and the
Supreme Revolutionary Tribunals.

14. Ibid., p. 4.
