248 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

firmation of the predictions of the Wisest of the Wise! Come on,
keep coming, you silly fools! The article and the retribution have
long since been waiting for you!

But it is appropriate to ask one thing more. There still were
prisoners of war who did not accept recruiting offers, who never
worked for the Germans at their profession or trade, and who
were not camp police, who spent the whole war in POW camps,
without sticking their noses outside, and who, in spite of every—
thing, did not die, however unlikely this was. For example, they
made cigarette lighters out of scrap metal, like the electrical
engineers Nikolai Andreyevich Semyonov and Fyodor Fyodoro—
vich Karpov, and in that way managed to get enough to eat. And
did the Motherland forgive them for surrendering?

No, it did not forgive them! I met both Semyonov and Karpov
in the Butyrki after they had already received their lawful sen—
tence. And what was it? The alert reader already knows: fen

. years of imprisonment and five muzzled. As brilliant engineers,
they had rejected German offers to work at their profession. In
1941 Junior Lieutenant Semyonov had gone to the front as a
volunteer. In 1942 he still didn‘t have a revolver; instead, he had
an empty holster—and the interrogator could not understand
why he hadn‘t shot himself with his holster! He had escaped from
captivity three times. And in 1945, after he had been liberated
from a concentration camp, seated atop a tank as a member of
a penalty unit of tank—borne infantry, he took part in the capture
of Berlin and received the Order of the Red Star. Yet, after all
that, he was finally imprisoned and sentenced. All of this mirrored
our Nemesis. .

Very few of the war prisoners returned across the Soviet border
as free men, and if one happened to get through by accident be—
cause of the prevailing chaos, he was seized later on, even as late
as 1946 or 1947. Some were arrested at assembly points in Ger—
many. Others weren‘t arrested openly right away but were trans—
ported from the border in freight cars, under convoy, to one of
the numerous Identification and Screening Camps (PFL‘s) scat—
tered throughout the country. These camps differed in no way
from the common run of Corrective Labor Camps (ITL‘s) ex—
cept that their prisoners had not yet been sentenced but would
be sentenced there. All these PFL‘s were also attached to some
