The Law Becomes a Man | 353

"Comrade Kursky! In my opinion we ought to extend the use
of execution by shooting (allowing the substitution of exile
abroad) to all activities of the Mensheviks, SR‘s, etc. We ought
to find a formulation that would connect these activities with the
international bourgeoisie.""" (Lenin‘s italics.)

To extend the use of execution by shooting! Nothing left to the
imagination there! (And did they exile very many?) Terror is a
method of persuasion." This, too, could hardly be misunderstood.

But Kursky, nonetheless, still didn‘t get the whole idea. In all
probability, what he couldn‘t quite work out was a way of formu—
lating that formulation, a way of working in that very matter of
connection. The next day, he called on the Chairman of the
Council of People‘s Commissars, Lenin, for clarification. We have
no way of knowing what took place during their conversation. But
following it up, on May 17, Lenin sent a second letter from
Gorki:

ComMrADE KurRsKY!

As a sequel to our conversation, I am sending you an outline of a
supplementary paragraph for the Criminal Code. . . . The basic
concept, I hope, is clear, notwithstanding all the shortcomings of the
rough draft: openly to set forth a statute which is both principled and
politically truthful (and not just juridically narrow) to supply the
motivation for the essence and the fustification of terror, its necessity,
its ljimits.

The court must not exclude terror. It would be self—deception or
deceit to promise this, and in order to provide it with a foundation
and to legalize it in a principled way, clearly and without hypocrisy
and without embellishment, it is necessary to formulate it as broadly
as possible, for only revolutionary righteousness and a revolutionary
conscience will provide the conditions for applying it more or less
broadly in practice.

With Communist greetings,
LeEnin‘!

We will not undertake to comment on this important docu—
ment. What it calls for is silence and reflection.

The document is especially important because it was one of
Lenin‘s last directives on this earth—he had not yet fallen ill——

15. Lenin, fifth edition, Vol. 45, p. 189.

16. Ibid., Vol. 39, pp. 404—405.
17. Ibid., Vol. 45, p. 190.
