582 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

back in Vladivostok, they were transporting, God save us, not
prisoners but volunteers for work in the Kolyma. A multitude of
Japanese small craft and boats hovered about the ships without
suspecting. (And on another occasion, in 1938, there was an
incident involving the Dzhurma: The thieves aboard got out of
the hold and into the storage room, plundered it, and set it afire.
The ship was very close to Japan when this occurred. Smoke
was pouring from it, and the Japanese offered help, but the cap—
tain refused to accept it and even refused to open the hatches.
When Japan had been left behind, the corpses of those suffocated
by smoke were thrown overboard, and the half—burned, half—
spoiled food aboard was sent on to camp as rations for the
prisoners.)®

Short of Magadan the ship caravan got caught in the ice and
not even the Krasin could help (it was too early for navigation,
but they had been in a hurry to deliver laborers). On May 2 they
disembarked the prisoners on the ice, some distance from the
shore. The newly arrived prisoners got a look at the cheerless
panorama of the Magadan of that time: dead hillocks, neither
trees, nor bushes, nor birds, just a few wooden houses and the
two—story building of "Dalstroi." Nonetheless, continuing to play
out the farce of correction, in other words, pretending they had
brought not simply bones with which to pave the gold—bearing
Kolyma but temporarily isolated Soviet citizens who would yet
return to creative life, they were greeted by the Dalstroi orchestra.
The orchestra played marches and waltzes, and the tormented,
half—dead people strung along the ice in a gray line, dragging their
Moscow belongings with them (and this enormous prisoner trans—
port consisted almost entirely of politicals who had hardly en—
countered a single thief yet) and carrying on their shoulders
other half—dead people—arthritis sufferers or prisoners without
legs. (And the legless, too, got prison terms.)

But here I note that I am again beginning to repeat myself.
And this will be boring to write, and boring to read, because the

6. Decades have passed since then, but how many times Soviet citizens have
met with misfortune on the world‘s oceans—and in circumstances where
it seems that zeks were not being transported—yet because of that same
secretiveness disguised as national pride they have refused help! Let the sharks
devour us, so long as we don‘t have to accept your helping hand! Secretiveness
—that is our cancer.
