420 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

made one another‘s acquaintance right in Kady. There they found
a remote, sad, impoverished region, badly in need of money,
machines, and intelligent economic management, but, instead,
starved by grain procurements. It happened that Fyodor Ivanovich
Smirnov, the First Secretary of the District Party Committee, was
a man with a strong sense of justice; Stavrov, the head of the
District Agricultural Department, was a peasant through and
through, one of those peasants known as the intensivniki—in
other words, the hard—working, zealous, and literate peasants who
in the twenties had run their farms on a scientific basis, for which
they were at that time rewarded by the Soviet government, since it
had not yet been decided that all these intensivniki must be de—
stroyed. Because Stavrov had entered the Party he had survived
the liquidation of the kulaks. (And maybe he even took part in
the liquidation of the kulaks?) These men tried to do something
for the peasants in their new district, but directives kept pouring
down from above and each one ran counter to some initiative of
theirs; it was as if, up there, they were busy thinking up what
they could do to make things worse and more desperate for the
peasants. And at one point the leaders in Kady wrote the province
leadership that it was necessary to lower the plan for procurement
of breadgrains because the district couldn‘t fulfill the plan without
becoming impoverished well below the danger point. One has to
recall the situation in the thirties (and maybe not only the
thirties?) to realize what sacrilege against the plan and what
rebellion against the government this represented! But, in ac—
cordance with then current style, measures were not taken directly
from above, but were left to local initiative. When Smirnov was
on vacation, his deputy, Vasily Fyodorovich Romanov, the Sec—
ond Secretary, arranged to have a resolution passed by the District
Party Committee: "The successes of the district would have been
even more brilliant [?] if it were not for the Trotskyite Stavrov."
This set in motion the "individual case" of Stavrov. (An interest—
ing approach: Divide and rule! For the time being, Smirnov was
merely to be frightened, neutralized, and compelled to retreat;
there would be time enough later on to get to him. And this, on a
small scale, was precisely the Stalinist tactic in the Central Com—
mittee.) At stormy Party meetings, however, it became clear that
Stavrov was about as much of a Trotskyite as he was a Jesuit. The
