430 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

Vlasov himself did not fail to take advantage of his last chance
to talk back impudently.

"I consider you not a court but actors pretending to be a court
in a stage farce where roles have already been written for you.
You are engaged in a repulsive provocation on the part of the
NKVD. You are going to sentence me to be shot no matter what
I say. I believe one thing only: the time will come when you will
be here in my place."*"

The court spent from 7 P.M. to 1 a.M. composing the verdict,
and all the while the kerosene lamps were burning in the hall,
and the defendants sat beneath drawn sabers, and there was a
hum of conversation among the spectators who had not left.

And just as it took them a long time to compose the verdict,
it took them a long time to read it, piling up on top of one an—
other all kinds of fantastic wrecking activities, contacts, and plans.
Smirnov, Univer, Saburov, and Vlasov were sentenced to be shot;
two others to ten years; one to eight years. In addition, the verdict
of the court led to the exposure of an additional wrecking organi—
zation in the Komsomol in Kady (whose members were, of course,
immediately arrested. Remember the young merchandise man—
ager?). And of a center of underground organizations in Ivanovo,
which was, of course, in its turn, subordinate to Moscow. (One
more nail in Bukharin‘s coffin.)

After the solemn words "To be shot!" the judges paused for
applause. But the mood in the hall was so gloomy, with the sighs
and tears of people who had no connection with the defendants,
and the screams and swooning of their relatives, that no applause
was to be heard even from the first two benches, where the Party
members were sitting. This, indeed, was totally improper. "Oh,
good Lord, what have you done?" someone in the hall shouted at
the members of the court. Univer‘s wife dissolved in tears. In the
half—darkness, the crowd began to stir. Vlasov shouted at the
front benches:

"Come on, you bastards, why aren‘t you clapping? Some Com—
munists you are!"

The political commissar of the guards platoon ran up to him
and shoved his revolver in his face. Vlasov reached out to grab
the revolver, but a policeman ran up and pushed back his po—
litical commissar, who had been guilty of a blunder. The chief

40. Generally speaking, he was wrong just on this one point.
