328 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

In a letter to Gorky on September 15, 1919—which we have
already cited—Vladimir Ilyich Lenin replied to Gorky‘s attempts
to intercede in the arrests of members of the intelligentsia, among
them, evidently, some of the defendants in this trial, and, com—
menting on the bulk of the Russian intelligentsia of those years
(the "close—to—the—Cadets intelligentsia"), he wrote: "In actual
fact they are not [the nation‘s]} brains, but shit.""* On another
occasion he said to Gorky: "If we break too many pots, it will be
its [the intelligentsia‘s] fault.""" If the intelligentsia wants justice,
why doesn‘t it come over to us? "I‘ve gotten one bullet from the
intelligentsia myself.""" (In other words, from Kaplan.)

On the basis of these feelings, he expressed his mistrust and
hostility toward the intelligentsia: rotten—liberal; "pious"; "the
slovenliness so customary among ‘educated‘ people";"" he be—
lieved the intelligentsia was always shortsighted, that it had
betrayed the cause of the workers. (But when had the intel—
ligentsia ever sworn loyalty to the cause of the workers, the
dictatorship of the workers?)

This mockery of the intelligentsia, this contempt for the intel—
ligentsia, was subsequently adopted with enthusiasm by the
publicists and the newspapers of the twenties and was absorbed
into the current of day—to—day life. And in the end, the members
of the intelligentsia accepted it too, cursing their eternal thought—
lessness, their eternal duality, their eternal spinelessness, and
their hopeless lagging behind the times.

And this was just! The voice of the accusing power echoed
and re—echoed beneath the vaults of the Verkhtrib, returning
us to the defendants‘ bench.

"This social stratum . . . has, during recent years, undergone
the trial of universal re—evaluation." Yes, yes, re—evaluation, as
was so often said at the time. And how did that re—evaluation
occur? Here‘s how: "The Russian intelligentsia which entered the
crucible of the Revolution with slogans of power for the people
[so, it had something to it after all!] emerged from it an ally of
the black [not even White!] generals, and a hired [!] and obedient

56. Lenin, fifth edition, Vol. 51, p. 48.

57 V. I. Lenin i A. M. Gorky (V. I. Lenin and A. M. Gorky), Moscow,
Academy of Sciences Publishing House, 1961, p. 263.

58. Ibid.
59. Lenin, fourth edition, Vol. 26, p. 373.
