60 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

And last of all there was a category I have not yet named, a
wave that was continually flowing: Section 10, also known as KRA
(Counter—Revolutionary Agitation) and also known as ASA
(Anti—Soviet Agitation). The wave of Section 10 was perhaps
the most constant of all. It never stopped, and whenever there
was another big wave, as, for instance, in 1937, 1945, and 1949,
its waters became particularly swollen.""

Paradoxically enough, every act of the all—penetrating, eternally
wakeful Organs, over a span of many years, was based solely on
one article of the 140 articles of the nongeneral division of the
Criminal Code of 1926,. One can find more epithets in praise of
this article than Turgenev once assembled to praise the Russian
language, or Nekrasov to praise Mother Russia: great, powerful,
abundant, highly ramified, multiform, wide—sweeping 58, which
summed up the world not so much through the exact terms of its
sections as in their extended dialectical interpretation.

Who among us has not experienced its all—encompassing em—
brace? In all truth, there is no step, thought, action, or lack of
action under the heavens which could not be punished by the
heavy hand of Article 58.

The article itself could not be worded in such broad terms,
but it proved possible to interpret it this broadly.

Article 58 was not in that division of the Code dealing with
political crimes; and nowhere was it categorized as "political."
No. It was included, with crimes against public order and
organized gangsterism, in a division of "crimes against the state."
Thus the Criminal Code starts off by refusing to recognize any—
one under its jurisdiction as a political offender. All are simply
criminals.

Article 58 consisted of fourteen sections.

In Section 1 we learn that any action (and, according to

27. This particular unremitting wave grabbed up anyone at all at any
moment. But when it came to outstanding intellectuals in the thirties, they
sometimes considered it cleverer to fabricate a case based on some conspicu—
ously shameful violation (like pederasty; or, in the case of Professor Pletnev,
the allegation that, left alone with a woman patient, he bit her breast, A national
newspaper reports such an incident—and just try to deny it!).
