First Cell, First Love® | 215

take away our books, she listened to our requests for new ones!
She heard us out in that same machinelike, inhuman Lubyanka
manner, and it was impossible to judge whether she had heard
the authors‘ names or the titles, whether, indeed, she had heard
our words at all. She would leave, and we would experience
several hours of nervous but happy expectation. During those
hours all the books we had returned were leafed through and
checked. They were examined in case we had left pinpricks or
dots underneath certain letters—for there was such a method
of clandestine intramural communication—or we had underlined
passages we liked with a fingernail. We were worried even though
we were totally innocent. They might come to us and say that
they had discovered pinpricks. They were always right, of course;
and, as always, no proof was required. And on that basis we could
be deprived of books for three months—if, indeed, they didn‘t put
the whole cell on a punishment—cell regime. It would be very
sad to have to do without books during the best and brightest of
our prison months, before we were tossed into the pit of camp.
Indeed, we were not only afraid; we actually trembled, just. as
we had in youth after sending a love letter, while we waited for
an answer. Will it come or not? And what will it say?

Then at last the books arrived and determined the pattern of
the next ten days. They would decide whether we would chiefly
concentrate on reading or, if they had brought us trash, be spénd—
ing more time in conversation. They brought exactly as many
books as there were people in the cell, this being the sort of —
calculation appropriate to a bread cutter and not a librarian: one
book for one person, six books for six persons. The cells with the
largest number of prisoners were the best off. . . .

Sometimes the spinster would fill our orders miraculously. But
even when she was careless about them, things could turn out
interestingly. Because the library of the Big Lubyanka was unique.
In all probability it had been assembled out of confiscated private
libraries. The bibliophiles who had collected those books had al—
ready rendered up their souls to God. But the main thing was that
while State Security had been busy censoring and emasculating
all the libraries of the nation for decades, it forgot to dig in its
own bosom. Here, in its very den, one could read Zamyatin, Pil—
nyak, Panteleimon Romanov, and any volume at all of the com—
