126 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

did replace the theoretically ideal isolation in solitary. And you
could not always decide in such a porridge of people with whom
to be forthright; and you could not always find someone from
whom to seek advice. And you would believe in the tortures and
beatings not when the interrogator threatened you with them but
when you saw their results on other prisoners.

You could learn from those who had suffered that they could
give you a salt—water douche in the throat and then leave you in
a box for a day tormented by thirst (Karpunich). Or that they
might scrape the skin off a man‘s back with a grater till it bled
and then oil it with turpentine. (Brigade Commander Rudolf
Pintsov underwent both treatments. In addition, they pushed
needles under his nails, and poured water into him to the bursting
point—demanding that he confess to having wanted to turn his
brigade of tanks against the government during the November
parade.)*" And from Aleksandrov, the former head of the Arts
Section of the All—Union Society for Cultural Relations with
Foreign Countries, who has a broken spinal column which tilts
to one side, and who cannot control his tear ducts and thus cannot
stop crying, one can learn how Abakumov himself could beat—in
1948.

Yes, yes, Minister of State Security Abakumov himself did not
by any means spurn such menial labor. (A Suvorov at the head
of his troops!) He was not averse to taking a rubber truncheon in
his hands every once in a while. And his deputy Ryumin was even
more willing. He did this at Sukhanovka in the "Generals‘ " inter—
rogation office. The office had imitation—walnut paneling on the
walls, silk portieres at the windows and doors, and a great Persian
carpet on the floor. In order not to spoil all this beauty, a dirty run—
ner bespattered with blood was rolled out on top of the carpet when
a prisoner was being beaten. When Ryumin was doing the beat—
ing, he was assisted not by some ordinary guard but by a colonel.
"And so," said Ryumin politely, stroking his rubber truncheon,
which was four centimeters—an inch and a half—thick, "you
have survived trial by sleeplessness with honor." (Alexander D.

26. In actual fact, he did lead his brigade at the parade, but for some reason
he did not turn it against the government. But this was not taken into account.
However, after these most varied tortures, he was sentenced to ten years by
the OSO. To that degree, the gendarmes themselves had no faith in their achieve—
ments.
