534 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

precisely what distinguishes one from another has no need to
travel about the country because he knows its geography full well
on the basis of transit prisons. Novosibirsk? I know it. I was
there. Very strong barracks there, made from thick beams.
Irkutsk? That was where the windows had been bricked over
in several stages, you could see how they had been in Tsarist
times, and each course had been laid separately, and only small
slits had been left between them. Vologda? Yes, an ancient build—
ing with towers. The toilets right on top of one another, the
wooden partitions rotten, and the ones above leaking down into
the ones underneath. Usman? Of course. A lice—ridden stinking
hole of a jail, an ancient vaulted structure. And they used to
pack it so full that whenever they took prisoners out for a
transport you couldn‘t imagine where they‘d put them all—a line
strung out halfway through the city.

You had better not tell such a connoisseur that you know some
city without a transit prison. He will prove to you conclusively
that there are no such cities, and he will be right. Salsk? Well,
there they keep transit prisoners in the KPZ—cells for prelim—
inary detention—along with prisoners under interrogation. And
what do you mean, no transit prison in every district center too?
In Sol—lletsk? Of course there‘s one. In Rybinsk? What about
Prison No. 2, a former monastery? It‘s a quiet one, too, with
empty courtyards paved with old, mossy flagstones and clean
wooden tubs in the bath. In Chita? Prison No. 1. In Naushki?
Not a prison but a transit camp, which is the same thing. In
Torzhok? Up the hill, also in a monastery.

You must realize, dear sir, that every town has to have its
own transit prison. After all, the courts operate everywhere. And
how are prisoners to be delivered to camp? By air?

Of course, no transit prison is the equal of another. But which
is better and which worse is something that can‘t be settled in an
argument. If three or four zeks get together, each of them feels
bound to praise his "own." Let us listen for a while to such a
discussion:

"Well, even if the Ivanovo Transit Prison isn‘t one of the more
famous, my friends, just ask anybody imprisoned there in the
winter of 1937—1938. The prison was unheated—and the prison—
ers not only didn‘t freeze to death, but on the upper bunks they
