268 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

cells I met some young codefendants of Yasevich who had al—
ready been sentenced to ten and fifteen years. The sentences
given everyone in their group were typed out on cigarette paper,
and for some reason they had it in their possession. Yasevich
was first on the list, and his sentence was: to be shot. So that was
what he saw—what he foresaw—through the wall with his still—
young eyes as he paced back and forth from the table to the
door! But his unimpaired consciousness of the correctness of his
path in life lent him extraordinary strength.

Among the émigrés was one my own age, Igor Tronko. We
became friends. Both of us were weak, dried out; our skin was
grayish—yellow on our bones. (Why had we collapsed to such an
extent? I think the main cause was spiritual confusion.) Both of
us were thin and on the tall side, and we were shaken by the
gusts of summer wind in the Butyrki courtyards. We always
walked side by side, with the careful steps of old men, and dis—
cussed the parallels in our lives. He had been born in South
Russia the same year as I. We were still nursing babes when
fate stuck her hand into her well—worn purse and drew out a
short straw for me and a long one for him. So it was that he
rolled off across the sea, even though his White Guard father
was just a rank—and—file, unpropertied telegrapher.

I found it interesting in the extreme to picture through his life
all those compatriots of my generation who had landed outside
Russia. They had grown up under good family supervision and
in very modest, even meager, circumstances. They were all very
well brought up and, within the range of existing possibilities,
well educated. They grew up without knowing fear or repression,
though the White organizations maintained a certain yoke of
authority over them until they themselves grew strong. They
grew up in such a way that the sins to which all European youth
was subject in that period—a high crime rate, a frivolous atti—
tude toward life, thoughtlessness, dissipation—did not touch
them. That was because they grew up, so to speak, in the
shadow of the indelible misfortune which had befallen their
families Whatever country they grew up in, they looked on
Russia alone as their Motherland. Their spiritual upbringing was
based on Russian literature, all the more beloved because to
them it was the beginning and end of their Motherland, because
