574 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

to haul coal for twenty—five stoves. But it wasn‘t so cushy to travel
this way in hot weather either. Two of the four tiny windows were
tightly sealed and the car roof would overheat and the convoy
wasn‘t about to exert itself in hauling water for a thousand prison—
ers—after all, they couldn‘t even manage to give just one Stolypin
car enough to drink. The prisoners considered April and Sep—
tember the best months for transports. But even the best of sea—
sons was too short if the train was en route for three months.
(Leningrad to Vladivostok in 1935.) And if such a long trip is in
prospect, then arrangements have been made for both political
indoctrination of the convoy soldiers and spiritual care of the
imprisoned souls: in a separate railroad car attached to such a
train travels a "godfather"—a Security officer. He has made his
preparations for the prisoner—transport train back in prison, and
prisoners are assigned to cars not simply at random but accord—
ing to lists he has validated. He is the one who appoints the
monitor in each car and who has instructed and assigned a stool
pigeon to each. At long stops he finds some pretext for sum—
moning both from the car and asks what the people are talking
about in there. And any such Security chief would be ashamed
to finish the journey without signed and sealed results. And so
right there en route he puts someone under interrogation, and lo
and behold! by the time they reach their destination, the prisoner
has been handed a new prison term.

No, damn that red cattle car train too, even though it did carry
the prisoners straight to their destination without changing trains.
Anyone who has ever been in one will never forget it. Just as well
get to camp sooner! Just as well arrive sooner.

A human being is all hope and impatience. As if the Security
officer in camp will be any more humane or the stoolies any less
unscrupulous. It‘s just the other way around. As if they won‘t
force us to the ground with those same threats and those same
police dogs when we arrive: "Sit down!" As if there will be
less snow on the ground in camp than what has sifted through
into the cattle cars. As if it means that we‘ve already gotten to
where we‘re going when they begin to unload us and won‘t be
carried farther in open flatcars on a narrow—gauge track. (And
how can they carry us in open flatcars? How can we be kept under
guard? That‘s a problem for the convoy. And here is how they
