That Spring | 247

up as spies, even though they‘d had only four or five grades of
rural school and were not even competent to cope with map and
compass.

It appears that they picked. the only way out they could. And
one would suppose that the whole thing was an expensive and
stupid game on the part of the German Command. But no! Hitler
played in rhythm and in tune with his brother dictator! Spy mania
was one of the fundamental aspects of Stalin‘s insanity. It seemed
to Stalin that the country was swarming with spies. All the Chinese
who lived in the Soviet Far East were convicted as spies—Article
58—6—and were taken to the northern camps, where they perished.
The same fate had awaited Chinese participants in the Soviet
civil war—if they hadnit cleared out in time. Several hundred
thousand Koreans were exiled to Kazakhstan, all similarly ac—
cused of spying. All Soviet citizens who at one time or another
had lived abroad, who at one time or another had hung around
Intourist hotels, who at one time or another happened to be
photographed: next to a foreigner, or who had themselves photo—
graphed a city building (the Golden Gate in Vladimir) were
accused of the same crime. Those who stared too long at railroad
tracks, at a highway bridge, at a factory chimney were similarly
charged. All the numerous foreign Communists stranded in the
Soviet Union, all the big and little Comintern officials and em—
ployees, one after another, without any individual distinctions,
were charged first of all with espionage.® And the Latvian Rifle—
men—whose bayonets were the most reliable in the first years
of the Revolution—were also accused of espionage when they
were arrested to a man in 1937. Stalin seems somehow to have
twisted around and maximized the famous declaration of that
coquette Catherine the Great: he would rather that 999 innocent
men should rot than miss one genuine spy. Given all this, how
could one believe and trust Russian soldiers who had really been
in the hands of the German  intelligence service? And how it
eased the burden for the MGB executioners when thousands of
soldiers pouring in from Europe did not even try to conceal that
they had voluntarily enlisted as spies. What an astonishing con—

6. lTosip Tito just barely escaped this fate. And Popov and Tanev, fellow
defendants of Dimitrov in the Leipzig trial, both got prison terms. (For Dimi—
trov himself Stalin prepared‘ another fate.)
