The Ships of the Archipelago | 519

arrived, he exacted payment from the Poles for crossing the
bridge. After all, without me you wouldn‘t have this bridge, you
pests! He collected tolls for a whole day (for vodka), and then
got bored with it, and this wasn‘t in any case the place for him to
stick around. So Captain Koverchenko offered the nearby Poles
his equitable solution: that they buy the bridge from him. (Was
he arrested for this! Nooo!) He didn‘t ask very much for it, but
the Poles protested and refused. Pan Captain abandoned the
bridge: All right then, to hell with you, take your bridge and
cross it for nothing.

In 1949 he was chief of staff of a parachute regiment in Po—
lotsk. Major Koverchenko was very much disliked by the Political
Branch of the division because he had failed the political indoc—
trination course. He had once asked them to recommend him for
admission to the Military Academy, but when they gave him the
recommendation, he took one look at it and threw it back across
the table at them: "With that kind of recommendation the place
for me to go is not the Academy but to the Banderovtsy [the
Ukrainian nationalist rebels]." (Was he arrested for that? He
might very well have gotten a tenner for it, but he got away with
it.) At that point, on top of all the rest, it turned out that he had
given one of his men an unwarranted leave. And then he himself
drove a truck at breakneck speed while drunk and wrecked it.
And so they gave him ten—ten days in the guardhouse. How—
ever, his own men, who loved him with absolute devotion, were
the guards, and they let him out of the guardhouse to go and have
fun in the village. So he could have been patient through that
guardhouse stretch too. But the Political Branch began to threaten
him with a trial! Now that threat shocked and insulted Kover—
chenko; it meant: for burying bombs—Ivan, we need you; but for
a lousy one—and—a—half—ton truck—off to prison with you? He
crawled out the window at night, went over to the Dvina River,
where a friend‘s motorboat was hidden, and off he went in it.

And it turned out that he wasn‘t just one more drunk with a
short memory: he wanted to avenge himself for everything the
Political Branch had done to him; and in Lithuania he left his
boat and went to the Lithuanians, saying: "Brothers, take me to
your partisans! Accept me and you won‘t be sorry; we‘ll twist
their tails." But the Lithuanians decided he was being planted on
them.
