The Law Becomes a Man | 369

But it was the sentence that was most wonderful: "Imposition
of the death penalty is not required in the interests of preserving
revolutionary law and order, and, on the grounds that motives of
vengeance should not influence the sense of justice of the prole—
tarian masses"—the death penalty was commuted to ten years‘
imprisonment.

Now that was a sensation! And it confused many minds too.
Did it mean a relaxation? A transformation? Ulrikh even pub—
lished in Pravda an apologetic explanation of why Savinkov had
not been executed.

You see how strong the Soviet government has become in
only seven years! Why should it be afraid of some Savinkov or
other! (On the twentieth anniversary of the Revolution, it is
going to get weaker, and don‘t be too hard on us because we are
going to execute thousands.)

And so, on the heels of the first riddle of his return, there
would have been the second riddle of his being spared capital
punishment had it not been overshadowed in May, 1925, by a
third riddle: in a state of depression, Savinkov jumped from an
unbarred window into the interior courtyard of the Lubyanka,
and the gaypayooshniki, his guardian angels, simply couldn‘t
manage to stop him and hold on to his big, heavy body. However,
just in case—so that there wouldn‘t be any scandal in the service
—Savinkov left them a suicide letter in which he explained
logically and coherently why he was killing himself—and this
letter was so authentically phrased, so clearly written in Savin—
kov‘s style and vocabulary, that even Lev Borisovich, the son of
the deceased, was fully convinced of its genuineness and explained
to everyone in Paris that no one except his father could have
written it and that he had ended his life because he realized his
political bankruptcy.*

And all the major and most famous trials are still ahead of us.

42. And we, silly prisoners of a later Lubyanka, confidently parroted to
one another that the steel nets hanging in the Lubyanka stairwells had been
installed after Savinkov had committed suicide there. Thus do we succumb to
fancy legends to the extent of forgetting that the experience of jailers is, after
all, international in character. Such nets existed in American prisons as long ago
as the beginning of the century—and how could Soviet technology have been
allowed to lag behind?

In 1937, when he was dying in a camp in the Kolyma, the former Chekist

Artur Pryubel told one of his fellow prisoners that he had been one of the
four who threw Savinkov from a fifth—floor window into the Lubyanka court—
