The Ports of the Archipelago | 543

after the bath they compel people to run naked and barefoot
through the snow to get their things (the counterintelligence of
the Second Byelorussian Front in Brodnica in 1945).

From your very first steps in the transit prison you realize that
here you are not in the hands of the jailers or the officers of the
prison administration, who at least adhere some of the time to some
kind of written law. Here you are in the hands of the trusties. That
surly bath attendant who comes to meet your prisoner transport:
"Well, go wash, gentlemen Fascists!" And that work—assignment
clerk with a plywood writing board who looks over your forma—
tion searchingly and hurries you up. And that instructor, clean—
shaven except for a prominent forelock, who slaps his leg with
that rolled—up newspaper and at the same time gives your bags a
once—over. And then other transit—prison trusties, whom you don‘t
recognize, penetrate your suitcases with X—ray eyes—oh, how
alike they all are! And where in your brief prisoner—transport
journey have you seen them all before? Not so clean—looking, not
so well washed, but the same kind of ugly—mug swine with p1t11ess
bare—toothed grins?

Baaaah! These are the same blatnye, the thieves, again. Those
same urki crooks, whom Leonid Utyosov glorifies in his songs.
Here again are Zhenka Zhogol, Seryoga—Zver, and Dimka Kish—
kenya, but not behind bars this time; they have been cleaned up,
dressed up as representatives of the state. And putting on airs of
great importance, they see to it that discipline is observed—by us.
And if one peers into those snouts, one can even, with imagina—
tion, picture that they sprang from the same Russian roots as the
rest of us—that once upon a time they were village boys whose
fathers bore such names as Klim, Prokhor, Guri, and that their
general structure is even similar to our own: two nostrils, two
irises in the eyes, a rosy tongue with which to swallow food and
utter certain Russian sounds, which, however, shape totally new
words.

Every chief of a transit prison has enough presence of mind to
realize that he can send his relatives back home the wages for all
staff positions or else he can divvy them up with the other prison
officers. And all you have to do is whistle to get as many vol—
unteers as you want from among the socially friendly prison ele—
ments to carry out all that work just in return for being allowed to
