The Supreme Measure | 437

law in 1932—1933 and shot people with special ferocity. In this
time of peace in December, 1932 (while Kirov was still alive), at
one time 265 condemned prisoners were awaiting execution in
Leningrad‘s Kresty Prison alone.© And during the whole year,
it would certainly seem that more than a thousand were shot in
Kresty alone.

And what kind of evildoers were these condemned men?
Where did so many plotters and troublemakers come from?
Among them, for example, were six collective farmers from
nearby Tsarskoye Selo who were guilty of the following crime:
After they had finished mowing the collective farm with their
own hands, they had gone back and mowed a second time along
the hummocks to get a little hay for their own cows. The All—
Russian Central Executive Committee refused to pardon all six
of these peasants, and the sentence of execution was carried out.

What cruel and evil Saltychikha, what utterly repulsive and
infamous serf—owner would have killed six peasants for their
miserable little clippings of hay? If one had dared to beat them
with birch switches even once, we would know about it and
read about it in school and curse that name.° But now, heave
the corpses into the water, and pretty soon the surface is all
smooth again and no one‘s the wiser. And one must cherish the
hope that someday documents will confirm the report of my
witness, who is still alive. Even if Stalin had killed no others, I
believe he deserved to be drawn and quartered just for the lives
of those six Tsarskoye Selo peasants! And yet they still dare
shriek at us (from Peking, from Tirana, from Thilisi, yes, and
plenty of big—bellies in the Moscow suburbs are doing it too):
"How could you dare expose him?" "How could you dare disturb
his great shade?" "Stalin belongs to the world Communist move—
ment!" But in my opinion all he belongs to is the Criminal Code.
"The peoples of all the world remember him as a friend." But
not those on whose backs he rode, whom he slashed with his
knout.

5. Testimony of B., who brought food to the cells of the prisoners con—
demned to be shot.

6. What isn‘t known in our schools is the fact that Saltychikha, by a verdict
of her own peers, was imprisoned for eleven years in the subterranean
crypt of the Ivanovsky Monastery in Moscow for the atrocities inflicted on

her serfs. (Prugavin, Monastyrskiye Tyurmy [Monastery Prisonsl, Posrednik
Publishers, p. 39.)
