446 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

months for his execution—yes, maybe even a whole year. As a
prisoner still under death sentence he was evacuated to the
Saratov Prison, where he was kept in a basement cell that had
no window. When his death sentence was commuted in the sum—
mer of 1942, he was transferred to a general cell, and he could
not even walk. Other prisoners carried him to the daily outdoor
walk, supporting him under the arms.

4. Prisoners sentenced to death were given no medical at—
tention. Okhrimenko was kept in a death cell for a long time
in 1938, and he became very ill. Not only did they refuse to put
him in the hospital, but the doctor took forever to come to see
him. When she finally did come, she didn‘t go into the cell;
instead, without examining him or even asking him any questions,
she handed him some powders through the bars. And fluid began
to accumulate in Strakhovich‘s legs—dropsy. He told the jailer
about it—and they sent him, believe it or not, a dentist.

And when a doctor did enter the picture, was it right for him
to cure the prisoner under sentence of death—in other words,
to prolong his expectation of death? Or did humanitarianism
dictate that the doctor should insist on execution as quickly
as possible? Here is another little scene from Strakhovich: The
doctor entered and, talking with the duty jailer, he pointed a
finger at the prisoners awaiting execution: "He‘s a dead man!
He‘s a dead man! He‘s a dead man!" (He was pointing out to
the jailer the victims of malnutrition and insisting that it was
wrong to torment people so, that it was time to shoot them.)

What, in fact, was the reason for holding them so long?
Weren‘t there enough executioners? One must point out that the
prison authorities often suggested to and even asked many of the
condemned prisoners to sign appeals for commutation; and when
prisoners objected strongly and refused, not wanting any more
"deals," they signed appeals in the prisoners names. And at the
very least it took months for the papers to move through the
twists and turns of the machine.

A clash between two different institutions was probably in—
volved. The interrogatory and judicial apparatus—as we learned
from the members of the Military Collegium, they were one and
the same—anxious to expose nightmarish and appalling cases,
