The Interrogation | 117

31. Or bridling (also known as "the swan dive")? This was
a Sukhanovka method—also used in Archangel, where the in—
terrogator Ivkov applied it in 1940. A long piece of rough
toweling was inserted between the prisoner‘s jaws like a bridle;
the ends were then pulled back over his shoulders and tied to his
heels. Just try lying on your stomach like a wheel, with your
spine breaking—and without water and food for two days!""

Is it necessary to go on with the list? Is there much left to
enumerate? What won‘t idle, well—fed, unfeeling people invent?

Brother mine! Do not condemn those who, finding themselves
in such a situation, turned out to be weak and confessed to more
than they should have. . . . Do not be the first to cast a stone
at them.

But here‘s the point! Neither these methods nor even the
"lightest" methods of all are needed to wring testimony from the
majority . . . for iron jaws to grip lambs who are unprepared
and longing to return to their warm hearths. The relationship of
forces to situations is too unequal.

Oh, in how new a light does our past life appear when re—
examined in the interrogator‘s office: abounding in dangers, like
an African jungle. And we had considered it so simple!

You, A, and your friend, B, have known each other for years
and have complete faith in one another. When you met, you
spoke out boldly about political matters large and small. No one
else was present. There was no one who could have overheard
you. And you have not denounced each other—not at all.

But at this point, for some reason, you, A, have been marked,
hauled out of the herd by the ears, and arrested. And for some
reason—well, maybe not without a denunciation on somebody‘s
part, and not without your apprehensions as to the fate of your
loved ones, and not without a certain lack of sleep, and not with—
out a bit of punishment cell—you have decided to write yourself
off but at the same time not to betray anyone else at any price.

You have therefore confessed in four depositions, and signed
them—declaring yourself to be a sworn enemy of Soviet power

20. NK.G.
