The Bluecaps | 177

and among its young people, year by year, step by step, is purged
of it.

What are we to do? Someday our descendants will describe
our several generations as generations of driveling do—nothings.
First we submissively allowed them to massacre us by the mil—
lions, and then with devoted concern we tended the murderers
in their prosperous old age.

What are we to do if the great Russian tradition of penitence
is incomprehensible and absurd to them? What are we to do if
the animal terror of hearing even one—hundredth part of all they
subjected others to outweighs in their hearts any inclination to
justice? If they cling greedily to the harvest of benefits they have
watered with the blood of those who perished?

It is clear enough that those men who turned the handle of the
meat grinder even as late as 1937 are no longer young. They are
fifty to eighty years old. They have lived the best years of their
lives prosperously, well nourished and comfortable, so that it is
too late for any kind of equal retribution as far as they are con—
cerned.

But let us be generous. We will not shoot them. We will not
pour salt water into them, nor bury them in bedbugs, nor bridle
them into a "swan dive," nor keep them on sleepless "stand—up"
for a week, nor kick them with jackboots, nor beat them with
rubber truncheons, nor squeeze their skulls in iron rings, nor
push them into a cell so that they lie atop one another like pieces
of baggage—we will not do any of the things they did! But for
the sake of our country and our children we have the duty to
seek them all out and bring them all to trial! Not to put them on
trial so much as their crimes. And to compel each one of them to
announce loudly:

"Yes, I was an executioner and a murderer."

And if these words were spoken in our country only one—
quarter of a million times (a just proportion, if we are not to fall
behind West Germany), would it, perhaps, be enough?

It is unthinkable in the twentieth century to fail to distinguish
between what constitutes an abominable atrocity that must be
prosecuted and what constitutes that "past" which "ought not to
be stirred up."

We have to condemn publicly the very idea that some people
