The Law as a Child | 305

Presiding Judge (laughing): "We‘ll enter it, we‘ll enter it!"
Laughter in the hall. The court exits in order to confer. The
sounds of a noisy argument come from the conference room.
They return with the sentence: to be shot.

Loud indignation in the hall.

Accuser: "I protest against the sentence and will complain to
the Commissariat of Justice!"

Defense Lawyer: "I join my voice to that of the accuser."

Presiding Judge: "Clear the hall!"

The convoy came and led Ye———v to jail, saying to him: "If
everyone was like you, brother, how good it would be! There
would be no war, and no Whites and no Reds!" They went back
to their barracks and called a Red Army meeting. It condemned
the sentence and sent a protest to Moscow.

In daily expectation of death, Ye———v waited for thirty—seven
«days, while, from the prison window, he watched executions tak—
ing place. They commuted his sentence to fifteen years of strict
detention.

This is an instructive example. Although "revolutionary legal—
ity" won a partial victory, how enormous an effort it required on
the part of the presiding judge! How much disorganization, lack
of discipline, lack of political consciousness there still was! The
prosecution stood firmly with the defense. The convoy guards
stuck their noses into something that wasn‘t their business in
order to send off a protest. Whew, the dictatorship of the prole—
tariat and the new kind of court were not having things easy by
any means! Of course, not all the sessions were anything like so
turbulent, but this wasn‘t the only one of its kind. How many
years it would take to reveal, direct, and confirm the necessary
line, until the defense would stand as one with the prosecution
and the court, and the accused would be in agreement with them
too, and all the resolutions of the workers as well!

To pursue this enterprise of many years‘ duration is the re—
warding task of the historian. As for us—how are we to make our
way through that rosy mist? Whom are we to ask about it? Those
who were shot aren‘t talking, and neither are those who have been
scattered to the four winds. Even if the defendants, and the
lawyers, and the guards, and the spectators have survived, no
one will allow us to seek them out.

Evidently, the only help we will get is from the prosecution.
