The Law as a Child | 311

thing to have to say—was given only three months of solitary—
just as though we were in Greece or some such place. (It is not
so shamefully lenient, however, if one stops to think that it was
only 1918! And if the old man managed to survive, he would
be imprisoned again, and many more times too!)

It may seem strange to us now, but it is a fact that in those
thunderous years bribes were given and taken just as tenderly
as they had been from time immemorial in Old Russia and as
they will be in the Soviet Union from here to eternity. Bribery
was particularly rife in the judicial organs. And, though we blush
to say it, in the Cheka. The official histories in their red, gold—
stamped bindings are silent about this, but the old folks and eye—
witnesses remember that the fate of political prisoners in the first
years of the Revolution, as distinct from Stalinist times, often
depended on bribes: they were accepted uninhibitedly, and pris—
oners were honestly released as a result. Although Krylenko
picked out only a dozen cases for the five—year period his book
covers, he reports two cases of bribery. Alas, even the Moscow
Tribunal and the Supreme Tribunal squeezed their way through
to perfection along a crooked path, muddied themselves in im—
proprieties.

B. The Case of the Three Interrogators of the Moscow Revtribunal—
April, 1918

In March, 1918, a speculator in gold bars named Beridze was
arrested. His wife tried to find a way to ransom her husband,
which was the accepted thing to do. Through a series of connec—
tions she succeeded in getting to one of the interrogators, who
brought two others in with him. Meeting secretly, they demanded
a bribe of 250,000 rubles, but, after some bargaining, they re—
duced it to 60,000, half in advance. The deal was to be made
through the lawyer Grin. Everything would have gone off without
a fuss, as hundreds of similar deals had, and the case would have
gotten into neither Krylenko‘s chronicle nor ours, nor even be—
come a matter of concern to the Council of People‘s Commissars,
had it not been that Beridze‘s wife began to get miserly, and
brought Grin only 15,000 as an advance payment, instead of
