320 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

vein. But in this other case, as a result of his mistaken judgment,
the image of the knight in shining armor, Kosyrev, was being
‘bespattered. And it created a situation in the tribunal wherein
Comrade Dzerzhinsky was forced to say: "For just one second
[Just one second!] the thought crossed my mind that citizen
Kosyrev might be falling victim to the political passions which in
recent times have blazed up around the Extraordinary Commis—
sion."**

And Krylenko suddenly took thought: "I do not wish, and I
never have wished, that the present trial should turn into a trial
of the Cheka rather than a trial of Kosyrev and Uspenskaya. Not
only am I unable to desire such an outcome: I am obliged to fight
against it with all available means!" And he went on: "The most
responsible, honest, and self—controlled comrades were put at
the head of the Extraordinary Commission, and they took on
themselves the difficult task of striking down the enemy, even
though this involved the risk of error. . . . For this the Revolution
is obliged to say thank you. . . . I underline this aspect so that

. . no one can ever say to me later: ‘He turned out to be an
instrument of political treason!‘ "** (But that‘s what they will say!)

What a razor edge the supreme accuser was walking! But he
evidently had certain contacts, going back to his days in the
underground, through which he learned how things were going
to move on the morrow. This is conspicuous in several trials, and .
came out here too. At the beginning of 1919, there were certain
trends toward saying: "It is enough! It is time to bridle the
Cheka!" And this moment was "beautifully caught in Bukharin‘s
essay, in which he said that revolutionary legality must give way
to legalized revolutionality."*"

Wherever you look you see dialectics! And Krylenko burst
out: "The Revtribunal is being called on to replace the Extraor—
dinary Commission." (To replace???) Meanwhile, it "must be
. . . no less fierce in implementing the system of terror, intimida—
tfion, and threat than was the Extraordinary Commission—the
Cheka."8 —

Than it was? The past tense? Has he already buried it? Come

43. Ibid., p. 509.
44. Ibid., pp. 505—510. (My italics.)

45. Ibid., p. 511.
46. Ibid.
