The Ships of the Archipelago | 503

or protest! But all your comrades, all your fellow Article 58‘s,
who have been plundered one by one even before you got there,
sit there submissively, hunched over, and they stare right past
you, and it‘s even worse when they look at you the way they
always do look at you, as though no violence were going on at
all, no plundering, as though it were a natural phenomenon, as
though it were the grass growing and the rain falling.

And the reason why, gentlemen, comrades, and brothers, is that
the proper time was allowed to slip by! You ought to have got
hold of yourselves and remembered who you were back when
Struzhinsky burned himself alive in his Vyatka cell, and even be—
fore that, when you were declared "counterrevolutionaries."

And so you allow the thieves to take your overcoat and paw
through your jacket and snatch your twenty rubles from where
it was sewn in, and your bag has already been tossed up above
and checked out, and everything your sentimental wife collected
for your long trip after you were sentenced stays up there, and
they‘ve thrown the bag back down to you with . . . your tooth—
brush.

Although not everyone submitted just like that, 99 percent did
in the thirties and forties.© And how could that be? Men, officers,
soldiers, front—line soldiers!

To strike out boldly, a person has to be ready for that battle,
waiting for it, and has to understand its purpose. All these condi—
tions were absent here. A person wholly unfamiliar with the
thieves‘—the blatnoi—milieu didn‘t anticipate this battle and,
most importantly, failed totally to understand its vital necessity.
Up to this point he had assumed (incorrectly) that his only
enemies were the bluecaps. He needed still more education to
arrive at the understanding that the tattooed chests were merely
the rear ends of the bluecaps. This was the revelation the bluecaps
never utter aloud: "You today, me tomorrow." The new
prisoner wanted to consider himself a political—in other words,
on the side of the people—while the state was against the people.
And at that point he was unexpectedly assaulted from behind and
both sides by quick—fingered devils of some kind, and all the

6. I have heard of a few cases in which three seasoned, young, and healthy
men stood up against the thieves—not to defend justice in general, but to

protect, not those who were being plundered right next to them, but themselves
only. In other words: armed neutrality.
