The Bluecaps | 163

Then the officer‘s stars were fastened on our tabs. And only
one month later, forming up my battery in the rear, I ordered a
careless soldier named Berbenyev to march up and down after
taps under the eyes of my insubordinate Sergeant Metlin. (And
do you know, I had forgotten all about it until now. I honestly
forgot about it for years! Only now, seated in front of this sheet
of paper, have I remembered.) Some elderly colonel, who was an
inspector, happened to be there, and he called me in and put me
to shame. And I (and this after I‘d left the university!) tried to
justify my action on the grounds that it was what we had been
taught in school. In other words, I meant: What humane views
can there be, given the fact that we are in the army?

(And the more so in the Organs.)

Pride grows in the human heart like lard on a pig.

I tossed out orders to my subordinates that I would not allow
them to question, convinced that no orders could be wiser. Even
at the front, where, one might have thought, death made equals of
us all, my power soon convinced me that I was a superior human
being. Seated there, I heard them out as they stood at attention.
I interrupted them. I issued commands. I addressed fathers and
grandfathers with the familiar, downgrading form of address—
while they, of course, addressed me formally. I sent them out to
repair wires under shellfire so that my superiors should not re—
proach me. (Andreyashin died that way.) I ate my officer‘s
ration of butter with rolls, without giving a thought as to why I
had a right to it, and why the rank—and—file soldiers did not. I, of
course, had a personal servant assigned to me—in polite terms, an
"orderly"—whom I badgered one way or another and ordered
to look after my person and prepare my meals separately from the
soldiers‘. (After all, the Lubyanka interrogators don‘t have order—
lies—that‘s one thing you can‘t say about them.) I forced my
soldiers to put their backs into it and dig me a special dugout at
every new bivouac and to haul the heaviest beams to support it
so that I should be as comfortable and safe as possible. And wait
a minute, yes, my battery always had a guardhouse too. What
kind of guardhouse could there be in the woods? It was a pit, of
course, although a better one than those at the Gorokhovets
division camps which I have described, because it had a roof and
the man confined got a soldier‘s ration. Vyushkov was imprisoned
