That Spring | 239

boards, and they, plus the fact that I was moving forward, helped
prevent my finding out why our POW‘s were so sad. But then
fate turned me around and sent me in the wake of those prisoners
along the same path they had taken. I had already marched with
them from army counterintelligence headquarters to the head—
quarters at the front, and when we got there I had heard their
first stories, which I didn‘t yet understand; and then Yuri Y.
told me the whole thing. And here beneath the domes of the
brick—red Butyrki castle, I felt that the story of these several mil—
lion Russian prisoners had got me in its grip once and for all, like
a pin through a specimen beetle. My own story of landing in
prison seemed insignificant. I stopped regretting my torn—off
shoulder boards. It was mere chance that had kept me from end—
ing up exactly where these contemporaries of mine had ended.
I came to understand that it was my duty to take upon my
shoulders a share of their common burden—and to bear it to the
last man, until it crushed us. I now felt as if I, too, had fallen
prisoner at the Solovyev crossing, in the Kharkov encirclement,
in the quarries of Kerch, and, hands behind my back, had carried
my Soviet pride behind the barbed wire of the concentration
camps; that I, too, had stood for hours in the freezing cold for
a ladle of cold Kawa (an ersatz coffee) and had been left on the
ground for dead, without even reaching the kettle; that in Oflag 68
(Suwalki) I had used my hands and the lid of a mess tin to dig
a bell—shaped (upturned, that is) foxhole, so as not to have to
spend the winter on the open field; and that a maddened prisoner
had crawled up to me as I lay dying to gnaw on the still warm
flesh beneath my arm; and with every new day of exacerbated,
 famished consciousness, lying in a barracks riddled with typhus,
or at the barbed wire of the neighboring camp for English
POW‘s, the clear thought had penetrated my dying brain: Soviet
Russia has renounced her dying children. She had needed them,
"proud sons of Russia," as long as they let the tanks roll over
them and it was still possible to rouse them to attack. But to feed
them once they were war prisoners? Extra mouths. And extra
witnesses to humiliating defeats.
Sometimes we try to lie but our tongue will not allow us to.
These people were labeled traitors, but a remarkable slip of the
tongue occurred—on the part of the judges, prosecutors, and
