The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 25

(because of us!) had been prisoners of war, or carried off to
Germany and subsequently repatriated. (This was Stalin‘s
method of cauterizing the wounds so that scar tissue would form
more quickly, and thus the body politic as a whole would not
have to rest up, catch its breath, regain its strength.) But in this
wave, too, the people were of the simpler kind, and they wrote
no memoirs.

But the wave of 1937 swept up and carried off to the Archi—
pelago people of position, people with a Party past, yes, educated
people, around whom were many who had been wounded and re—
mained in the cities . . . and what a lot of them had pen in hand!
And today they are all writing, speaking, remembering: "Nine—
teen thirty—seven!" A whole Volga of the people‘s grief!

But just say "Nineteen thirty—seven" to a Crimean Tatar, a
Kalmyk, a Chechen, and he‘ll shrug his shoulders. And what‘s
1937 to Leningrad when 1935 had come before it? And for the
second—termers (i.e., repeaters), or people from the Baltic coun—
tries—weren‘t 1948 and 1949 harder on them? And if sticklers
for style and geography should accuse me of having omitted
some Russian rivers, and of not yet having named some of the
waves, then just give me enough paper! There were enough
waves to use up the names of all the rivers of Russia!

It is well known that any organ withers away if it is not used.
Therefore, if we know that the Soviet Security organs, or Organs
(and they christened themselves with this vile word), praised
and exalted above all living things, have not died off even to the
extent of one single tentacle, but, instead, have grown new ones
and strengthened their muscles—it is easy to deduce that they
have had constant exercise.

Through the sewer pipes the flow pulsed. Sometimes the
pressure was higher than had been projected, sometimes lower.
But the prison sewers were never empty. The blood, the sweat,
and the urine into which we were pulped pulsed through them
continuously. The history of this sewage system is the history of
an endless swallow and flow; flood alternating with ebb and ebb
again with flood; waves pouring in, some big, some small; brooks
and rivulets flowing in from all sides; trickles oozing in through
gutters; and then just plain individually scooped—up droplets.

The chronological list which follows, in which waves made up
