The Ports of the Archipelago | 541

cells, but they were antiquated and small, and the only reasonable
thing to do at that point was to remove them, since they amounted
to nothing at all for the new reinforcements of prisoners. So if long
ago the Minusinsk Prison had been built for five hundred people
(Vladimir Ilyich Lenin was never inside it; he moved about
freely), and there were now ten thousand in it, it meant that each
latrine bucket ought to have become twenty times bigger. But it
had not.

Our Russian pens write only in large letters. We have lived
through so very much, and almost none of it has been described
and called by its right name. But, for Western authors, peering
through a microscope at the living cells of everyday life, shaking
a test tube in the beam of a strong light, this is after all a whole
epic, another ten volumes of Remembrance of Things Past: to
describe the perturbation of a human soul placed in a cell filled
to twenty times its capacity and with no latrine bucket, where
prisoners are taken out to the toilet only once a day! Of course,
much of the texture of this life is bound to be quite unknown to
Western writers; they wouldn‘t realize that in this situation one
solution was to urinate in your canvas hood, nor would they at
all understand one prisoner‘s advice to another to urinate in his
boot! And yet that advice was the fruit of wisdom derived from
vast experience, and it didn‘t involve spoiling the boot and it
didn‘t reduce the boot to the status of a pail. It meant that the
boot had to be taken off, turned upside down, the boot tops turned
inside out and up—and thus a cylindrical vessel was formed that
constituted the much—needed container. But, at the same time,
with what psychological twists and turns Western writers could
enrich their literature (without in the least risking any banal repe—
tition of the famous masters) if they only knew about the scheme
of things in that same Minusinsk Prison: there was only one food
bow! for every four prisoners; and one mug of drinking water per
day was issued to each (there were enough mugs to go around).
And it could happen that one of the four contrived to use the
bowl! allotted to him and three others to relieve his internal pres—
sure and then refuse to hand over his daily water ration to wash
it out before lunch. What a conflict! What a clash of four per—
sonalities! What nuances! (And I am not joking. That is when
the rock bottom of a human being is revealed. It is only that
