290 5 THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

venient moment broke off for a good lunch. And when evening be—
gan to fall, they had to go and confer. But who confers at night?
They left the prisoners to sit at their desks all night long and
went on home. At nine in the morning they came in all brisk
and freshly shaved: "Rise. The court is in session." And all the
prisoners were given a "ten—ruble bill" apiece.

And if anyone should object that the OSO at least proceeded
without hypocrisy, whereas there was hypocrisy in instances like
the above—they pretended to be conferring but didn‘t really con—
fer—we would certainly have to enter a strong—very strong—
dissent!

Well, the third and final characteristic is dialectics. (Which
used to be crudely described in the folk saying: "Whichever way
you point a wagon tongue, that‘s the way it goes.") The Code
cannot be a dead weight in the path of the judge. The articles of
the Code had been around during ten, fifteen, twenty years of
rapid change, and, just as Faust said:

The whole world changes and everything moves forward,
And why should I be afraid to break my word?

All the articles of the Code had become encrusted with inter—
pretations, directions, instructions. And if the actions of the
accused are not covered by the Code, he can still be convicted:

e By analogy (What opportunities!)

e Simply because of origins (7—35: belonging to a socially
dangerous milieu)®

e For contacts with dangerous persons‘ (Here‘s scope for
you! Who is "dangerous" and what "contacts" consist of
only the judge can say.)

But one should not complain about the precise wording of our
published laws either. On January 13, 1950, a decree was issued
re—establishing capital punishment. (One is bound, of course, to

5. In the Republic of South Africa, terror has gone to such lengths in recent
years that every suspicious (SDE—Socially Dangerous Element) black can be
arrested and held for three months without investigation or trial. Anyone can
see immediately the flimsiness of this: why not from three to ten years?

6. This is something we hadn‘t known, something the newspaper Izvestiya
told us in July, 1957.
