The Ships of the Archipelago | 495

and you can eat it at the next transit point where there is water to
be had. It‘s worse when they issue you wet Sea of Azov anchovies,
covered with coarse salt. You can‘t keep them in your pocket; so
scoop them up in the flaps of your pea jacket, or in your handker—
chief, in the palm of your hand—and eat them. They divide up
these Azov anchovies on somebody‘s pea jacket, whereas the
convoy guards dump the dried carp right on the floor of the com—
partment, and it is divided up on the benches, on the prisoners‘
knees.®

But once they‘ve given you a fish, they aren‘t going to hold
back on the bread, and maybe they‘ll even throw in a bit of
sugar. Things are much worse when the convoy comes over and
announces: "We aren‘t going to be feeding you today; nothing
was issued for you." And it could very well be that nothing was
actually issued: someone in one or another prison accounting
office made a mistake in the figures. And it could also be that it
was issued but that the convoy was short on rations—after all,
they aren‘t exactly overfed either—and so they decided to snag
a bit of your bread for themselves; and in that case to hand over
half a herring by itself would seem suspicious.

And, of course, it is not for the purpose of intentionally tortur—
ing the prisoner that after his herring he is given neither hot water
(and he never gets that here in any case) nor even plain, unboiled
water. One has to understand the situation: The convoy staff is
limited; some of them have to be on watch in the corridor; some
are on duty on the platform; at the stations they clamber all over
the car, under it, on top of it, to make sure that there aren‘t any
holes in it. Others are kept busy cleaning guns, and then, of course,
there has to be time for political indoctrination and their cate—
chism on the articles of war. And the third shift is sleeping. They
insist on their full eight hours—for, after all, the war is over.
And then, to go carry water in pails—it has to be hauled a long

3. P. F. Yakubovich (V Mire Otverzhennykh [In the World of the Outcasts],
Vol. 1, Moscow, 1964), writing about the nineties of the last century, recounts
that in those terrible years they gave out ten—kopecks—a—day mess money per
person in Siberian prisoner transports, when the price of a loaf of wheat bread
(weighing ten and a half ounces?) was five kopecks; a pot of milk (two
quarts?) three kopecks. "The prisoners were simply in clover," he writes. But
then in Irkutsk Province the prices were higher. A pound of meat cost ten
kopecks there and the "prisoners were simply famished!" One pound of meat
per day per person—it‘s not half a herring, is it?
