374 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

to society"—but not all of them did, only sixteen; thirteen
wiggled back and forth, and twenty—four didn‘t admit their guilt
at all.* This introduced an impermissible discord, and the masses
could certainly not understand it. Along with its positive aspects
—which had, incidentally, already been displayed in earlier trials
—such as the helplessness of the defendants and of the defense
attorneys, and their inability either to budge or to deflect the
implacable boulder of the sentence—the shortcomings of the
new trial were fully apparent. Someone less experienced than
Krylenko might have been forgiven them—but not he.

On the threshold of the classless society, we were at last capable
of realizing the conflictless trial—a reflection of the absence
of inner conflict in our social structure—in which not only the
judge and the prosecutor but also the defense lawyers and the
defendants themselves would strive collectively to achieve their
common purpose.

Anyway, the whole scale of the Shakhty case, comprising as
it did the coal industry alone and the Donets Basin alone, was
disproportionately paltry for this era.

It appears that then and there, on the day the Shakhty case
ended, Krylenko began to dig a new, capacious pit. (Even two
of his own colleagues in the Shakhty case—the public accusers
Osadchy and Shein—fell into it.) And it goes without saying
that the entire apparatus of the OGPU, which had already landed
in Yagoda‘s firm hands, aided him willingly and adroitly. It was
necessary to create and uncover an engineers‘ organization which
encompassed the entire country. And for this purpose it was
essential to have several strong, prominent "wreckers" at its head.
And what engineer was unaware of just such an unequivocally
strong and impatiently proud leader—Pyotr Akimovich Pal—
chinsky? An important mining engineer from as far back as the
beginning of the century, he had been the Deputy Chairman of
the War Industry Committee during World War I—in other
words, he had directed the war efforts of all Russian industry,
which had managed, during the course of the war, to make up for
the failures in Tsarist preparations. After February, 1917, he
became the Deputy Minister of Trade and Industry. He had been
persecuted under the Tsar for revolutionary activity. He had been
imprisoned three times after October—in 1917, 1918, and 1922.

4. Pravda, May 24, 1928, p. 3.
