354 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

and an important part of his political testament. Ten days after
this letter, he suffered his first stroke, from which he recovered
only incompletely and temporarily in the autumn months of 1922.
Perhaps both letters to Kursky were written in that light and
airy white marble boudoir—study at the corner of the second floor,
where the future deathbed of the leader already stood waiting.

Attached to this letter is the rough draft mentioned in it, con—
taining two versions of the supplementary paragraph, out of which
would grow in a few years‘ time both Article 58—4 and all of
our dear little old mother, Article 58. You read it and you are
carried away with admiration: that‘s what it really means to
formulate it as broadly as possible! That‘s what is meant by
extending its use. You read and you recollect how broad was
the embrace of that dear little old mother.

". . . propaganda or agitation, or participation in an organiza—
tion, or assistance (objectively assisting or being capable of assist—
ing) .. . organizations or persons whose activity has the charac—
ter . . ."

Hand me St. Augustine, and in a trice I can find room in that
article for him too.

Everything was inserted as required; it was retyped; execution
by shooting was extended—and the session of the All—Russian
Central Executive Committee adopted the new Criminal Code
shortly after May 20 and decreed it to be in effect from June 1,
1922, on.

And so began, on the most legal basis, the two—month—long

J. Trial of the SR‘s—June 8—August 7, 1922

The court was the Supreme Tribunal, the Verkhtrib. The usual
presiding judge, Comrade Karklin (a good name for a judge—
derived from the word meaning to "croak" or "caw"), was re—
placed for this important trial, which was being watched closely
by the entire socialist world, by the resourceful Georgi Pyatakov.
(Provident fate enjoys its little jokes—but it also leaves us time
to think things over! It left Pyatakov fifteen years.) There were
no defense lawyers. The defendants, all leading SR‘s, undertook
their own defense. Pyatakov bore himself harshly, and interfered
with the defendants‘ having their say.
