552 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

Gulag. And that foreign bearing of his. And his fluent English,
German, and Swedish speech. According to him he was the son
of a rich Swede—not merely a millionaire but a billionaire. (Well,
let‘s assume he embellished a little.) On his mother‘s side he was
a nephew of the British General Robertson, who commanded the
British Zone in occupied Germany. A Swedish subject, he had
served as a volunteer in the British Army and had actually landed
in Normandy, and after the war he had become a Swedish career
officer. However, the investigation of social systems remained one
of his principal interests. His thirst for socialism was stronger
than his attachment to his father‘s capital. He looked upon Soviet
socialism with feelings of profound sympathy, and he had even
had the chance to become convinced of its flourishing state with
his own eyes when he had come to Moscow as a member of
a Swedish military delegation. They had been given banquets
and taken to country homes and there they had encountered
no obstacles at all to establishing contact with ordinary Soviet
citizens—with pretty actresses who for some reason never had to
rush off to work and who willingly spent time with them, even
téte—a—téte. And thus convinced once and for all of the triumph
of our social system, Erik on his return to the West wrote articles
in the press defending and praising Soviet socialism. And this
proved to be his undoing. In those very years, in 1947 and 1948,
they were roping in from all sorts of nooks and crannies progres—
sive young Westerners prepared to renounce the West publicly
(and it appeared that if they could only have collected another
dozen or so the West would shudder and collapse). Erik‘s news—
paper articles caused him to be regarded as suitable for this
category. At the time he was serving in West Berlin, and he had
left his wife in Sweden. And out of pardonable male weakness
he used to visit an unmarried German girl in East Berlin. And it
was there that he was bound and gagged one night (and is not
this the significance of the proverb which says: "He went to see
his cousin, and he ended up in prison"? This had probably been
going on for a long time, and he wasn‘t the first). They took him
to Moscow, where Gromyko, who had once dined at his father‘s
home in Stockholm and who knew the son also, not only returned
the hospitality but proposed to the young man that he renounce
publicly both capitalism and his own father. And in return he was
