270 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

send me wherever you please, just as long as it is under the
Soviet government and the sun is there!" No one was threatening
to deprive us of the Soviet government, of course: just of the sun.
No one wanted to be sent beyond the Arctic Circle, to scurvy
and malnutrition. For some reason, a legend about the Altai
region in particular flourished in the cells. Those rare persons
who had been there at one time or another, but especially those
who had never been there, wove melodious dreams about the
wonderful country of the Altai for their cellmates! It had the
vast expanses of Siberia and a mild climate. Rivers of honey
flowing between banks of wheat. The steppe and mountains.
~ Herds of sheep, flocks of wildfowl, shoals of fish. Populous, rich
villages.""

Oh, if only we could find a hiding place in that quiet! If only
we could listen to the pure resounding of the cock crow in the
unpolluted air! Or stroke the good, serious face of a horse!
Curses on you, all you great problems! Let someone else beat
his head against you, someone more stupid. Oh, just to rest there
from the interrogator‘s mother oaths and the monotonous un—
winding of your whole life, from the crash of the prison locks,
from the suffocating stuffiness of the cell. Only one life is allotted
us, one small, short life! And we had been criminal enough to
push ours in front of somebody‘s machine guns, or drag it with
us, still unsullied, into the dirty rubbish heap of politics. There,
in the Altai, it appeared, one could live in the lowest, darkest
hut on the edge of the village, next to the forest. And one could
go into the woods, not for brushwood and not for mushrooms,
but just to go, for no reason, and hug two tree trunks: Dear ones,
you‘re all I need.

And the spring itself sounded a summons to mercy. It was the
spring that marked the ending of such an enormous war! We saw
that millions of us prisoners were flowing past and knew that
millions more would greet us in the camps. It just couldn‘t be
that so many people were to remain in prison after the greatest

15. Does not the prisoner‘s dream of the Altai simply continue the old
peasant dream about it? The so—called lands of His Majesty‘s Cabinet were in
the Altai, and because of this the area was closed to colonization much longer
than the rest of Siberia. But it was there that the peasants wanted most of all
to settle—and where they actually settled. Is it not from this that the enduring
legend has arisen?
