470 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

Artificial feeding has much in common with rape. And that‘s
what it really is: four big men hurl themselves on one weak being
and deprive it of its one interdiction—they only need to do it
once and what happens to it next is not important. The element
of rape inheres in the violation of the victim‘s will: "It‘s not going
to be the way you want it, but the way I want it; lie down and sub—
mit." They pry open the mouth with a flat disc, then broaden the
crack between the jaws and insert a tube: "Swallow it." And if
you don‘t swallow it, they shove it farther down anyway and then
pour liquefied food right down the esophagus. And then they
massage the stomach to prevent the prisoner from resorting to
vomiting. The sensation is one of being morally defiled, of
sweetness in the mouth, and a jubilant stomach gratified to the
point of delight.

Science did not stand still, and other methods were developed
for artificial feeding: an enema through the anus, drops through
the nose.

4. A new view of the hunger strike: that hunger strikes are a
continuation of counterrevolutionary activity in prison, and must
be punished with a new prison term. This aspect promised to give
rise to a very rich new category in the practices of the New Type
Prison, but it remained essentially in the realm of threats. And
it was not, of course, any sense of humor that cut it short, but
most likely simple laziness: why bother with all that when
patience will take care of it? Patience and more patience—the
patience of a well—fed person vis—a—vis one who is starving.

Approximately in the middle of 1937, a new directive came:
From now on the prison administration will not in any respect
be responsible for those dying on hunger strikes! The last vestige
of personal responsibility on the part of the jailers had disap—
peared! (In these circumstances, the prosecutor of the province
would not have come to visit Chebotaryev!) Furthermore, so that
the interrogator shouldn‘t get disturbed, it was also announced
that days spent on hunger strike by a prisoner under interroga—
tion should be crossed off the official interrogation period. In
other words, it should not only be considered that the hunger
strike had not taken place, but the prisoner should be regarded
as not having been in prison at all during the period of the strike.
Thus the interrogator would not be to blame for being behind
