The Bluecaps | 171

she read quietly, but then a conversation began—perhaps because
the others were bored—and Vera launched aloud into a real
religious sermon. (One would have had to know her to ap—
preciate this to the full. She was a luminous person, with a
lively mind and a gift of eloquence, even though in freedom she
had been no more than a lathe operator, a stable girl, and a
housewife.) They listened to her impressively, now and then ask—
ing questions in order to clarify something or other. It was catch—
ing them from an unexpected side of things. People came in from
other offices, and the room filled up. Even though they were only
typists, stenographers, file clerks, and not interrogators, in 1946
this was still their milieu, the Organs. It is impossible to recon—
struct her monologue. She managed to work in all sorts of things,
including the question of "traitors of the Motherland." Why were
there no traitors in the 1812 War of the Fatherland, when there
was still serfdom? It would have been natural to have traitors
then! But mostly she spoke about religious faith and religious
believers. Formerly, she declared, unbridled passions were the
basis for everything—"Steal the stolen goods"—and, in that state
of affairs, religious believers were naturally a hindrance to you.
But now, when you want to build and prosper in this world, why
do you persecute your best citizens? They represent your most
precious material: after all, believers don‘t need to be watched,
they do not steal, and they do not shirk. Do you think you can
build a just society on a foundation of self—serving and envious
people? Everything in the country is falling apart. Why do you
spit in the hearts of your best people? Separate church and state
properly and do not touch the church; you will not lose a thing
thereby. Are you materialists? In that case, put your faith in
education—in the possibility that it will, as they say, disperse
religious faith. But why arrest people? At this point Goldman
came in and started to interrupt rudely. But everyone shouted at
him: "Oh, shut up! Keep quiet! Go ahead, woman, talk." (And
how should they have addressed her? Citizeness? Comrade?
Those forms of address were forbidden, and these people were
bound by the conventions of Soviet life. But "woman"—that was
how Christ had spoken, and you couldn‘t go wrong there.) And
Vera continued in the presence of her interrogator.

So there in the MGB office those people listened to Korneyeva
