230 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

a year—old son. Take good care of him for the Lord. The hour will
come—and I will come to you again." Then he left.

Pelageya did not have the faintest idea who this man was. But
he had spoken so clearly and authoritatively that her mother‘s
heart accepted his word as law. And she cared for her child like
the apple of her eye. Viktor grew up to be quiet, obedient, and
pious; and he often saw visions of the angels and the Holy Virgin.
But, as he grew up, these visions became less frequent. The elderly
man did not come again. Viktor learned to be a chauffeur, and
in 1936 he was taken into the army and sent off to Birobidzhan,
where he was stationed in an auto transport company. He was not
at all overly familiar or cheeky, and perhaps it was his quiet
demeanor and modesty, so untypical of a chauffeur, which at—
tracted a civilian girl employee. But the commander of his platoon
was after the same girl and found himself out in the cold because
of Viktor. At this time, Marshal Bliicher came to their area for
maneuvers and his personal chauffeur fell seriously ill. Bliicher
ordered the commander of the motor company to send him the
best driver in the company; the company commander summoned
the platoon commander, who immediately latched onto the idea
of dumping his rival, Belov. (That‘s the way it often is in the
army. The person who deserves promotion doesn‘t get it, and
the person they want to get rid of does.) In addition, Belov was
sober, a hard worker, and reliable—he wouldn‘t let them
down.

Bliicher liked Belov. So Belov stayed with him. Soon Bliicher
was summoned to Moscow on a plausible pretext. This was how
they separated the marshal from his power base in the Far East
before arresting him. He had brought his own chauffeur, Belov,
to Moscow with him. Having lost his boss, Belov then landed in
the Kremlin garage and began chauffeuring, sometimes for Mi—
khailov (of the Komsomol), sometimes for Lozovsky or some—
body else in the leadership, and, finally, for Khrushchev. He had
a close view of things—and he told us a lot, too, about the feasts,
the morals, the security precautions. As a representative of the
rank—and—file Moscow proletariat, he was also present at the trial
of Bukharin in the House of the Unions. Of all those for whom
he worked, he spoke well only of Khrushchev. Only in Khru—
shchev‘s home was the chauffeur seated at the family table instead
of being put in the kitchen. Only there, in those years, did he
