The Law as a Child | 317

fusion, he gave testimony against them! (And Meshcherskaya—
Grevs had already gotten to the Control and Auditing Collegium,
and they had already ordered her husband‘s case transferred there
for verification.)

But just a moment! After all, an exposé like this sullies the
heavenly blue uniforms of the Cheka! Was the presiding judge of
the Moscow Revtribunal in his right mind? Was he really tending
to his own business?

But it turns out that that was the nature of the moment—a
moment totally hidden from us in the folds of our majestic history!
It seems that the Cheka‘s first year of work had produced a some—
what repellent impression even on the Party of the proletariat,
which still hadn‘t gotten used to it. Only its first year had passed,;
the Cheka had taken only the first step on its glorious path; and
already, as Krylenko writes, although not very clearly, a "dispute"
had arisen "between the court and its functions and the extra—
judicial functions of the Cheka . . . a dispute which, at the time,
split the Party and the workers‘ districts into two camps.""* And
that is how the Kosyrev case could come up—whereas everything
had gone smoothly before—and reach all the way up to the top—
most level of the whole state apparatus.

The Cheka had to be saved! Help! Save the Cheka! Solovyev
asked the tribunal to allow him inside the Taganka Prison to
visit Godelyuk (who, alas, was not in the Lubyanka) so as to
chat with him. The tribunal declined the request. Then Solovyev
managed to penetrate into Godelyuk‘s cell without the help of
any tribunal, and—what a coincidence!—at that very point
Godelyuk became seriously ill. ("One can hardly speak of evil
intentions on Solovyev‘s part," Krylenko bows and scrapes.)
Feeling the approach of death, Godelyuk shakily repented hav—
ing slandered the Cheka and asked for a sheet of paper on which
to write his recantation: it was all untrue; he had slandered
Kosyrev and the other commissars of the Cheka, and everything
the stenographer had —taken down behind the curtain was also
untrue!"

38. Krylenko, op. cit., p. 14.

39. Oh, how many themes we have here! Oh, where is Shakespeare? Solovyev
passes through the walls, flickering shadows in the cell, Godelyuk recants with
failing hand. And all we hear about the years of the Revolution in our plays
and our films is the street singing of "Hostile Whirlwinds."
