210 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

them about from cell to cell, and every newcomer brought all his
accumulated experience to his new cell. Thus it was that we,
imprisoned on the fourth floor, knew all about the cellar cells,
about the boxes on the first floor, about the darkness on the second
floor, where the women were all kept, about the split—level arrange—
ment of the fifth, and about the biggest cell of all on the fifth
floor—No. 111. Before my time, the children‘s writer Bondarin
had been a prisoner in our cell, and before that he had been on
the women‘s floor with some Polish correspondent or other, who
had previously been a cellmate of Field Marshal von Paulus—and
that was how we learned all the details about von Paulus.

The period for being summoned to interrogation passed. And
for those left in the cell a long, pleasant day stretched ahead,
lightened by opportunities and not overly darkened by duties.
Duties could include sterilizing the cots with a blow torch twice
a month. (At the Lubyanka, matches were categorically for—
bidden to prisoners; to get a light for a cigarette we had to signal
patiently with a finger when the peephole was opened, thus asking
the jailer for a light. But blow torches were entrusted to us with—
out hesitation.) And once a week we might be called into the
corridor to have our faces clipped with a dull clipper—allegedly
a right but strongly resembling a duty. And one might be as—
signed the duty of cleaning the parquet floor in the cell. (Z———v
always avoided this work because it was beneath his dignity, like
any other work, in fact.) We got out of breath quickly because
we were underfed; otherwise we would have considered this duty
a privilege. It was such gay, lively work—pushing the brush
forward with one‘s bare foot, torso pulled back, and then turn
about; forward—back, forward—back, and forget all your grief!
Shiny as a mirror! A Potemkin prison!

Besides, we didn‘t have to go on being overcrowded in our
old Cell 67 any longer. In the middle of March they added a sixth
prisoner to our number, and since here in the Lubyanka they did
not fill all the cells with board bunks, nor make you sleep on the
floor, they transferred all of us into a beauty of a cell—No. 53.
(I would advise anyone who has not yet been in it to pay it a
visit.) This was not a cell. It was a palace chamber set aside as a
sleeping apartment for distinguished travelers! The Rossiya In—
surance Company, without a thought for economy, had raised the
