124 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

ate their power to destroy him and those he loved as well as
their authority to pardon (which the Organs didn‘t even have).
They pretended that there was some connection between the
sincerity of a prisoner‘s "repentance" and a reduction in his sen—
tence or an easing of the camp regimen. (No such connection ever
existed.) While the prisoner was still in a state of shock and tor—
ment and totally beside himself, they tried to get from him very
quickly as many irreparably damaging items of evidence as pos—
sible and to implicate with him as many totally innocent persons
as possible. Some defendants became so depressed in these circum—
stances that they even asked not to have the depositions read to
them. They could not stand hearing them. They asked merely
to be allowed to sign them, just to sign and get it over with.
Only after all this was over would the prisoner be released from
solitary into a large cell, where, in belated desperation, he would
discover and count over his mistakes one by one.

How was it possible not to make mistakes in such a duel? Who
could have failed to make a mistake?

We said that "ideally he was to be kept alone." However, in the
overcrowded prisons of 1937, and, for that matter, of 1945 as
well, this ideal of solitary confinement for a newly arrested de—
fendant could not be attained. Almost from his first hours, the
prisoner was in fact in a terribly overcrowded common cell.

But there were virtues to this arrangement, too, which more
than made up for its flaws. The overcrowding of the cells not only
took the place of the tightly confined solitary "box" but also as—
sumed the character of a first—class forture in itself . . . one that
was particularly useful because it continued for whole days and
weeks—with no effort on the part of the interrogators. The
prisoners tortured the prisoners! The jailers pushed so many
prisoners into the cell that not every one had even a piece of floor;
some were sitting on others‘ feet, and people walked on people
and couldn‘t even move about at all. Thus, in the Kishinev KPZ‘s
—Cells for Preliminary Detention—in 1945, they pushed eigh—
teen prisoners into a cell designed for the solitary confinement
of one person; in Lugansk in 1937 it was fiffteen."" And in 1938

22. And the interrogation there lasted eight to ten months at a time. "Maybe
Klim [Voroshilov] had one of these to himself," said the fellows there. (Was
he, in fact, ever imprisoned?)
