In the Engine Room | 295

that he wanted to give supplementary testimony. This, of course,
provoked curiosity. He was received by the prosecutor. Karetnikov
displayed his infected collarbone, broken by the interrogator
who had struck him with a stool, and declared: "I signed every—
thing under torture." By this time the prosecutor was cursing
himself for having been so greedy to get "supplementary" testi—
mony, but it was too late. Each of them is fearless only as long
as he is an anonymous cog in the whole machine. But just as
soon as the responsibility has become personalized, individualized,
concentrated on him, just as soon as the searchlight is on him, he
grows pale and realizes that he is nothing and can slip on any
chance banana peel. So Karetnikov caught the prosecutor, and the
latter was unwilling to suppress the whole business. The session of
the M111tary Collegium began and Karetnikov repeated his state—
ment in front of them. Now there was a case in which the Military
Collegium went out and really conferred! But the only verdict
they could have brought in was acquittal, which would have
meant releasing Karetnikov on the spot. Therefore they brought
in no verdict at all!

As if nothing at all had happened, they took Karetnikov back
to prison, treated his collarbone, and kept him another three
months. A very polite new interrogator entered the case, who
wrote out a new warrant for Karetnikov‘s arrest. (If the Col—
legium had not twisted things, he might at least have spent those
three months as a free man.) The interrogator asked the same
questions as the first interrogator. Karetnikov, sensing freedom
in the offing, conducted himself staunchly and refused to admit
any guilt whatever. And what happened next? He got eight years
from an OSO.

This example shows well enough the possibilities available to
the prisoner and the possibilities available to the OSO. It was the
poet Derzhavin who wrote:

A partial court is worse than banditry.

Judges are enemies; there sleeps the law.

In front of you the citizen‘s neck

Lies stretched out, quiet and without defense.

But it was a rare thing for such accidents to take place in the
M111tary Collegium of the Supreme Court. For that matter, it
was in general rare for it to rub clear its clouded eyes and take

Auc
