80 ] THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

and it was the noble task of the Special Branches to keep that
army from growing rusty. And for lack of anything to do, the
heroes of Khalkhin—Gol and Khasan began to let their tongues
wag, especially after they were permitted to examine the Degtya—
rev automatic pistols and the regimental mortars, which until
then had been kept secret even from Soviet soldiers. With such
weapons in their hands, it was hard for them to understand why
we were retreating in the west. With all Siberia and the Urals
between them and European Russia, it was not easy for them to
grasp that in retreating seventy miles a day we were simply re—
peating the Kutuzov entrapment maneuver. Their comprehension
could be helped along only by means of a wave from the Eastern
Army. And at that point lips tightened and faith became steely.

It was obvious that a wave had also to roll in high places—of
those to blame for the retreat. (After all, it was not the Great
Strategist who was at fault!) It was a small wave, just half a hun—
dred men, a generals‘ wave. They were in Moscow prisons by the
summer of 1941, and in October, 1941, they were sent off on a
prisoner transport. Most of the generals were from the air force;
among them were Air Force Commander Smushkevich and Gen—
eral Ptukhin, who was known to have said: "If I had known, I
would have first bombed our Dear Father, and then gone off to
prison!" And there were others.

The victory outside Moscow gave rise to a new wave: guilty
Muscovites. Looking at things after the event, it turned out that
those Muscovites who had not run away and who had not been
evacuated but had fearlessly remained in the threatened capital,
which had been abandoned by the authorities, were by that very
token under suspicion either of subverting governmental authority
(58—10) ; or of staying on to await the Germans (58—1a, via 19, a
wave which kept on providing fodder for the interrogators of
Moscow and Leningrad right up to 1945).

It need hardly be said that 58—10, ASA—Anti—Soviet Agita—
tion—never let up but hovered over the front and in the rear
throughout the war. Sentences under 58—10 were handed out to
evacuees who talked about the horrors of the retreat (it was
clear from the newspapers that the retreat was proceeding accord—
ing to plan) ; to those in the rear who were guilty of the slanderous
rumor that rations were meager; to those at the front who were
guilty of the slanderous rumor that the Germans had excellent
