136 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

brought in my accursed suitcase—including many notebooks of
my "War Diary," written in hard, light pencil in a needle—thin
handwriting, with some of the notes already partially washed out.
These diaries constituted my claim to becoming a writer. I had
not believed in the capacities of our amazing memory, and
throughout the war years I had tried to write down everything I
saw. That would have been only half a catastrophe: I also wrote
down everything I heard from other people. But opinions and
stories which were so natural in front—line areas seemed to be
treasonable here in the rear and reeked of raw imprisonment for
my front—line comrades. So to prevent that interrogator from
going to work on my "War Diary" and mining from it a whole
case against a free front—line tribe, I repented just as much as I
had to and pretended to see the light and reject my political mis—
takes. I became utterly exhausted from this balancing on a razor‘s
edge, until I recognized that no one was being hauled in for a
confrontation with me and distinguished the clear signs that the
interrogation was drawing to an end . . . until, in the fourth month,
all the notebooks of my "War Diary" were cast into the hellish
maw of the Lubyanka furnace, where they burst into flame—the
red pyre of one more novel which had perished in Russia—and
flew out of the highest chimney in black butterflies of soot.

We used to walk in the shadow of that chimney, our exercise
yard a boxlike concrete enclosure on the roof of the Big Lub—
yanka, six floors up. The walls rose around us to approximately
three times a man‘s height. With our own ears we could hear
Moscow—automobile horns honking back and forth. But all we
could see was that chimney, the guard posted in a seventh—floor
tower, and that segment of God‘s heaven whose unhappy fate it
was to float over the Lubyanka.

Oh, that soot! It kept falling on and on in that first postwar
May. So much of it fell during each of our walks that we decided
the Lubyanka must be burning countless years of files. My
doomed diary was only one momentary plume of that soot. I
recalled a frosty sunny morning in March when I was sitting in
the interrogator‘s office. He was asking his customary crude ques—
tions and writing down my answers, distorting my words as he
did so. The sun played in the melting latticework of the frost on
the wide window, through which at times I felt very much like
jumping, so as to flash through Moscow at least in death and
