First Cell, First Love | 211

height of the ceiling in this wing to sixteen and a half feet."" (Oh,
what four—story bunks the chief of counterintelligence at the
front would have slapped in here. And he could have gotten one
hundred people in, results guarantfeed.) And the window! It
was such an enormous window that standing on its sill the jailer
could hardly reach the "fortochka," that hinged ventilation pane.
One section of this window alone would have made a fine whole
window in an ordinary house. Only the riveted steel sheets of the
muzzle closing off four—fifths of it reminded us that we were not
in a palace after all.

Nonetheless, on clear days, above this muzzle, from the wall
of the Lubyanka courtyard, from some windowpane or other on
the sixth or seventh floor, we now and then got a pale reflection
of a ray of sunlight. To us it was a real ray of sunlight—a living,
dear being! We followed with affection its climb up the wall.
And every step it made was filled with meaning, presaging the
time of our daily outing in the fresh air, counting off several half—
hours before lunch. Then, just before lunch, it disappeared.

And our rights included being let out for a walk, reading books,
telling one another about the past, listening and learning, arguing
and being educated! And we would be rewarded by a lunch that
included two courses! Too good to be true!

The walk was bad on the first three floors of the Lubyanka.
The prisoners were let out into a damp, low—lying little courtyard
—the bottom of a narrow well between the prison buildings. But
the prisoners on the fourth and fifth floors, on the other hand,
were taken to an eagle‘s perch—on the roof of the fifth floor. It
had a concrete floor; there were concrete walls three times the
height of a man; we were accompanied by an unarmed jailer; on
the watch tower was a sentinel with an automatic weapon. But
the air was real and the sky was real! "Hands behind your back!
Line up in pairs! No talking! No stopping!" Such were the com—
mands, but they forgot to forbid us to throw back our heads.
And, of course, we did just that. Here one could see not a re—

18. This company acquired a piece of Moscow earth that was well ac—
quainted with blood. The innocent Vereshchagin was torn to pieces in 1812
on Furkasovsky, near the Rostopchin house. And the murderess and serf—owner
Saltychikha lived—and killed serfs—on the other side of the Bolshaya Lub—
yanka. (Po Moskve [In Moscow], edited by N. A. Geinike and others, Moscow,
Sabashnikov Publishers, 1917, p. 231.)
