The Law Becomes a Man | 343

beneath the snow and ice for several years.) Just one film about
famine might throw a new light on everything we saw and
everything we know about the Revolution and the Civil War.
But there are no films and no novels and no statistical re—
search—the effort is to forget it. It does not embellish. Besides,
we have come to blame the kulaks as the cause of every famine—
and just who were the kulaks in the midst of such collective
death? V. G. Korolenko, in his Letters to Lunacharsky (which,
despite Lunacharsky‘s promise, were never officially published
in the Soviet Union)," explains to us Russia‘s total, epidemic
descent into famine and destitution. It was the result of pro—
ductivity having been reduced to zero (the working hands
were all carrying guns) and the result, also, of the peasants‘
— utter lack of trust and hope that even the smallest part of the
harvest might be left for them. Yes, and someday someone will
also count up those many carloads of food supplies rolling on and
on for many, many months to Imperial Germany, under the
terms of the peace treaty of Brest—Litovsk—from a Russia which
had been deprived of a protesting voice, from the very provinces
where famine would strike—so that Germany could fight to the
end in the West.

There was a direct, immediate chain of cause and effect. The
Volga peasants had to eat their children because we were so
impatient about putting up with the Constituent Assembly.

But political genius lies in extracting success even from the
people‘s ruin. A brilliant idea was born: after all, three billiard
balls can be pocketed with one shot. So now let the priests feed
the V olga region! They are Christians. They are generous!

1. If they refuse, we will blame the whole famine on them
and destroy the church.

2. If they agree, we will clean out the churches.

3. In either case, we will replenish our stocks of foreign ex—
change and precious metals.

Yes, and the idea was probably inspired by the actions of the
church itself. As Patriarch Tikhon himself had testified, back in
August, 1921, at the beginning of the famine, the church had

11. Published in Paris in 1922, and in the Soviet Union in samizdat in 1967.
