370 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

yard! (And there is no conflict between that statement and Ardamatsky‘s recent
account: There was a low sill; it was more like a door to the balcony than a
window—they had picked the right room! Only, according to Ardamatsky, the
guards were careless; according to Pryubel, they rushed him all together.)

Thus the second riddle, the unusually lenient sentence, was unraveled by
the crude third "riddle."

The story ascribed to Pryubel could not be checked, but I had heard it, and
in 1967 I told it to M. P. Yakubovich. He, with his still youthful enthusiasm
and shining eyes, exclaimed: "I believe it. Things fit! And I didn‘t believe
Blyumkin; I thought he was just bragging." What he had learned was this:
At the end of the twenties, Blyumkin had told Yakubovich, after swearing him
to secrecy, that he was the one who had written Savinkov‘s so—called suicide
note, on orders from the GPU. Apparently Blyumkin was allowed to see
Savinkov in his cell constantly while he was in prison. He kept him amused in the
evenings. (Did Savinkov sense that death was creeping up on him . . . sly,
friendly death, which gives you no chance to guess the form your end will
take?) And this had helped Blyumkin acquire Savinkov‘s manner of speech
and thought, had enabled him to enter into the framework of his last ideas.

And they ask: Why throw him out the window? Wouldn‘t it have been
easier simply to poison him? Perhaps they showed someone the remains or
thought they might need to.

And where, if not here, is the right place to report the fate of Blyumkin,
who for all his Chekist omnipotence was fearlessly brought up short by Man—
delstam. Ehrenburg began to tell Blyumkin‘s story, and suddenly became
ashamed and dropped the subject. And there is a story to tell, too. After the
1918 rout of the Left SR‘s, Blyumkin, the assassin of the German Ambassador
Mirbach, not only went unpunished, was not only spared the fate of all the
other Left SR‘s, but was protected by Dzerzhinsky, just as Dzerzhinsky had
wanted to protect Kosyrev. Superficially he converted to Bolshevism, and was
kept on, one gathers, for particularly important assassinations. At one point,
close to the thirties, he was secretly sent to Paris to kill Bazhenov, a member
of the staff of Stalin‘s secretariat who had defected, and one night he succeeded
in throwing him off a train. However, his gambler‘s blood, or perhaps his
admiration of Trotsky, led Blyumkin to the Princes‘ Islands in Turkey, where
Trotsky was living. He asked Trotsky whether there were any assignments he
could carry out for him in the Soviet Union, and Trotsky gave him a package
for Radek. Blyumkin delivered it, and his visit to Trotsky would have remained
a secret had not the brilliant Radek already been a stool pigeon. Radek brought
down Blyumkin, who was thereupon devoured by the maw of the monster his
own hands had suckled with its first bloody milk.
