The Ships of the Archipelago | 505

peaceful people (very often elderly, too, and often ill), and they
had gotten along all their lives with words and without resorting
to fisticuffs, and they weren‘t any more prepared for them now
than they had been before.

Nor had the thieves ever been put through the same kind of
interrogation. Their entire interrogation had consisted of two
sessions, an easy trial, and an easy sentence, and they wouldn‘t
have to serve it out. They would be released ahead of time: either
they would be amnestied or else they would simply escape." Even
during interrogation, no one ever deprived a thief of his legitimate
parcels—consisting of abundant packages from the loot kept by
his underworld comrades who were still on the loose. He never
grew thin, was never weak for a single day, and in transit he ate
at the expense of the innocent nonthieves, whom he called, in his
own jargon, the frayera®—"frayers," or "innocents," or "suckers."
Not only did the articles of the Code dealing with thieves and
bandits not oppress the thief; he was, in fact, proud of his con—
victions under them. And he was supported in this pride by all the
chiefs in blue shoulder boards and blue piping. "Oh, that‘s
nothing. Even though you‘re a bandit and a murderer, you are not
a traitor of the Motherland, you are one of our own people; you
will reform." There was no Section Eleven—for organization—
in the thieves‘ articles in the Code. Organization was not for—
bidden the thieves. And why should it be? Let it help develop in
them the feelings of collectivism that people in our society need
so badly. And disarming them was just a game. They weren‘t
punished for having a weapon. Their thieves‘ law was respected
("They can‘t be anything but what they are"). And a new murder
in the cell would not increase a murderer‘s sentence, but instead
would bring him new laurels.

And all that went very deep indeed. In works of the last cen—
tury, the lumpenproletariat was criticized for little more than a
certain lack of discipline, for fickleness of mood. And Stalin was
always partial to the thieves—after all, who robbed the banks for

7. V. I. Ivanov (now from Ukhta) got Article 162 (thievery) nine times
and Article 82 (escape) five times, for a total of thirty—seven years in prison—
and he "served out" five to six years for all of them.

8. "Frayer" is a blatnoi—underworld—word meaning nonthief—in other
words, not a Chelovek ("Human being," with a capital letter), Well, even
more simply: the frayera were all nonthief, nonunderworld mankind.
