First Cell, First Love | 217

aged to roll himself a cigarette four times the size of an ordi—
nary one.

Thus, after three weeks‘ confinement in a cellar box, Yuri
Nikolayevich Y. made his appearance in our cell.

From the time of the 1929 incidents on the Chinese Eastern
Railroad, the song had been sung throughout the land:

Its steel breast brushing aside our enemies,
The 27th stands on guard!

The chief of artillery of this 27th Infantry Division, formed
back in the Civil War, was the Tsarist officer Nikolai Y. (I re—
membered the name because it was the name of one of the
authors of our artillery textbook.) In a heated freight car that
had been converted into living quarters, and always accompanied
by his wife, this artillery officer had crossed and recrossed the
Volga and the Urals, sometimes moving east and sometimes west.
It was in this heated freight car that his son, Yuri, born in 1917,
and twin brother, therefore, of the Revolution itself, spent his
first years.

That was a long time ago. Since then his father had settled in
Leningrad, in the Academy, and lived well and frequented high
circles, and the son graduated from the officer candidate school.
During the Finnish War, Yuri wanted desperately to fight for
the Motherland, and friends of his father got him an appointment
as an aide on an army staff. Yuri did not have to crawl on his
stomach to destroy the Finns‘ concrete artillery emplacements, nor
get trapped and encircled on a scouting mission, nor freeze in
the snow under sniper bullets—but his service was nevertheless
rewarded, not with some ordinary decoration, but with the Order
of the Red Banner, which fitted neatly on his field shirt. Thus he
completed the Finnish War in full consciousness of its justice and
his own part in it.

But he didn‘t have things so easy in the next war. The battery
he commanded was surrounded near Luga. They scattered and
were caught and driven off into prisoner—of—war camps. Yuri
found himself in a concentration camp for officers near Vilnius.

In every life there is one particular event that is decisive for
the entire person—for his fate, his convictions, his passions. Two
years in that camp shook Yuri up once and for all. It is impossible
