From Island to Island | 613

are arrested: he had taken an fron stand within the group, but
he quickly broke down under interrogation. He got less than any
of the others—five years—and it looked as though he were
secretly counting a good deal on his influential papa to get
him out.

And then in the Butyrki church I encountered Georgi Ingal,
the eldest of the three. Despite his youth, he was already a candi—
date—member of the Union of Soviet Writers. He had a very bold
pen. His style was one of strong contrasts. If he had been willing
to make his peace politically, vivid and untrodden literary paths
would have opened up before him. He had already nearly finished
a novel about Debussy. But his early success had not emasculated
him, and at the funeral of his teacher, Yuri Tynyanov, he had
made a speech declaring that Tynyanov had been persecuted—
and by this means had assured himself of an eight—year term.

And right then Gammerov caught up with us, and, while wait—
ing to go to Krasnaya Presnya, I had to face up to their united
point of view. This confrontation was not easy for me. At the
time I was committed to that world outlook which is incapable
of admitting any new fact or evaluating any new opinion before
a label has been found for it from the already available stock:
be it the "hesitant duplicity of the petty bourgoisie," or the
"militant nihilism of the déclassé intelligentsia." I don‘t recall
that Ingal and Gammerov attacked Marx in my presence, but
I do remember how they attacked Lev Tolstoi, and from what
direction the attack was launched! Tolstoi rejected the church?
But he failed to take into account its mystical and its organizing
role. He rejected the teachings of the Bible? But for the most part
modern science was not in conflict with the Bible, not even with
its opening lines about the creation of the world. He rejected the
state? But without the state there would be chaos. He preached
the combining of mental and physical work in one individual‘s
life? But that was a senseless leveling of capabilities and talents.
And, finally, as we see from Stalin‘s violence, an historical per—
sonage can be omnipotent, yet Tolstoi scoffed at the very idea.*

4. In my preprison and prison years I, too, had long ago come to the
conclusion that Stalin had set the course of the Soviet state in a fateful direc—
tion. But then Stalin died quietly—and did the ship of state change course
very noticeably? The personal, individual imprint he left on events consisted
of dismal stupidity, petty tyranny, self—glorification. And in all the rest he
followed the beaten path exactly as it had been signposted, step by step.
