First Cell, First Love | 219

It was already clear to them that the Germans were not the
heart of the matter, or at least not the Germans alone; that among
the POW‘s of many nationalities only the Soviets lived like this
and died like this. None were worse off than the Soviets. Even the
Poles, even the Yugoslavs, existed in far more tolerable condi—
tions; and as for the English and the Norwegians, they were in—
undated by the International Red Cross with parcels from home.
They didn‘t even bother to line up for the German rations. Wher—
ever there were Allied POW camps next door, their prisoners,
out of kindness, threw our men handouts over the fence, and
our prisoners jumped on these gifts like a pack of dogs on a
bone.

The Russians were carrying the whole war on their shoulders
—and this was the Russian lot. Why?

Gradually, explanations came in from here and there: it turned
out that the U.S.S.R. did not recognize as binding Russia‘s signa—
ture to the Hague Convention on war prisoners. That meant that
the U.S.S.R. accepted no obligations at all in the treatment of war
prisoners and took no steps for the protection of its own soldiers
who had been captured."" The U.S.S.R. did not recognize the In—
ternational Red Cross. The U.S.S.R. did not recognize its own
soldiers of the day before: it did not intend to give them any
help as POW‘s.

And the heart of Yuri, enthusiastic twin of the October Revo—
lution, grew cold. In their barracks room, he and the elderly artist
clashed and argued. It was difficult for Yuri to accept. Yuri re—
sisted. But the old man kept peeling off layer after layer. What
was it all about? Stalin? But wasn‘t it too much to ascribe every—
thing to Stalin, to those stubby hands? He who draws a con—
clusion only halfway fails to draw it at all. What about the rest
of them? The ones right next to Stalin and below him, and every—
where around the country—all those whom the Motherland had
authorized to speak for it?

What is the right course of action if our mother has sold us to

20. We did not recognize that 1907 Convention until 1955. Incidentally, in
his diary for 1915, Melgunov reports rumors that Russia would not let aid go
through for its prisoners in Germany and that their living conditions were
worse than those of all other Allied prisoners—simply in order to prevent
rumors about the good life of war prisoners inducing our soldiers to surrender
willingly. There was some sort of continuity of ideas here. (Melgunov, Vos—
pominaniya i Dnevniki, Vol. I, pp. 199 and 203.)
