The Ships of the Archipelago | 529

time to look around and figure out how to escape, you are shoved
and pushed so that you and your bag get stuck in the narrow
little door and you knock your head against the lintel. The steel
rear door slams shut with a bang—and off you go.

It was rare, of course, to spend hours in a Black Maria; twenty
to thirty minutes were more likely. But you got flung around, it
was a bone—breaker, it crushed all your insides during those half—
hours, your head stooped if you were tall, and you remembered
the cozy Stolypin with longing.

And the Black Maria means one thing further—it is a re—
shuffling of the deck, new encounters, and among them those
which stand out most clearly are, of course, your encounters with
the thieves. You may never happen to be in the same compart—
ment with them, and maybe they won‘t put you in the same cell
with them even at the transit prison, but here in the Black Maria
you are in their hands.

Sometimes it is so crowded that even the thieves, the urki,
find it awkward to filch. Your legs and your arms are clamped
between your neighbors‘ bodies and bags as tightly as if they were
in stocks. Only when all of you are tossed up and down and all
your insides are shaken up by ruts and bumps can you change
the position of your legs and arms.

Sometimes, in less crowded circumstances, the thieves can
check out the contents of all the bags in just half an hour and
appropriate all the "bacilli"~—the fats and goodies—and the best
of the "trash"—the clothing. Cowardly and sensible considera—
tions most likely restrain you from putting up a fight against
them. (And crumb by crumb you are already beginning to lose
your immortal soul, still supposing that the main enemies and the
main issues lie somewhere ahead and that you must save yourself
for them.) And you might just throw a punch at them once and
get a knife in the ribs then and there. (There would be no in—
vestigation, and even if there should be one, it wouldn‘t threaten
the thieves in any way: they would only be delayed at the transit
prison instead of going to the far—off camp. You must concede
that in a fight between a socially friendly prisoner and a socially
hostile prisoner the state simply could not be on the side of the
latter.)

In 1946, retired Colonel Lunin, a high—ranking official in
