162 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

look back over my actual career as an officer and I was horrified.

I did not move in one stride from being a student worn out by
mathematics to officer‘s rank. Before becoming an officer I spent
a half—year as a downtrodden soldier. And one might think I
would have gotten through my thick skull what it was like always
to obey people who were perhaps not worthy of your obedience
and to do it on a hungry stomach to boot. Then for another half—
year they tore me to pieces in officer candidate school. So I ought
to have grasped, once and for all, the bitterness of service as a
rank—and—file soldier and remembered how my hide froze and how
it was flayed from my body. But did I? Not at all. For consolation,
they pinned two little stars on my shoulder boards, and then a
third, and then a fourth. And I forgot every bit of what it had been
like!

Had I at least kept my student‘s love of freedom? But, you see,
we had never had any such thing. Instead, we loved forming up,
we loved marches.

I remember very well that right after officer candidate school
I experienced the happiness of simplification, of being a military
man and not having to think things through; the happiness of
being immersed in the life everyone else lived, that was accepted
in our military milieu; the happiness of forgetting some of the
spiritual subtleties inculcated since childhood.

We were constantly hungry in that school and kept looking
around to see where we could grab an extra bite, and we watched
one another enviously to see who was the cleverest. But most of
all we were afraid we wouldn‘t manage to stay in until the time
came to graduate and receive our officer‘s insignia. (They sent
those who failed to the battle for Stalingrad.) And they trained
us like young beasts, so as to infuriate us to the point where we
would later want to take it out on someone else. We never got
enough sleep because after taps, as punishment, we might be
forced to go through the drill alone under the eyes of a sergeant.
Or the entire squad might be routed out at night and made to
form up because of one uncleaned boot: there he is, the bastard,
and he‘ll keep on cleaning it, and until he gets a shine on it you‘re
all going to stay standing there.

In passionate anticipation of those insignia, we developed a
tigerlike stride and a metallic voice of command.
