That Spring | 253

From his photograph, it was impossible to believe that he was
an outstanding man or that for long years he had suffered pro—
foundly for Russia. As for the leaflets reporting the creation of
the ROA, the "Russian Liberation Army," not only were they
written in bad Russian, but they were imbued with an alien
spirit that was clearly German and, moreover, seemed little con—
cerned with their presumed subject; besides, and on the other
hand, they contained crude boasting about the plentiful chow
available and the cheery mood of the soldiers. Somehow one
couldn‘t believe in that army, and, if it really did exist, what kind
of cheery mood could it be in? Only a German could lie like
that.°

 

army. The only planes in the air, of course, were German. And only then, in
mockery, were they given permission to pull back behind the Volkhov. They
made several hopeless attempts to break through—until the beginning of July.

And so it was that Vlasov‘s Second Shock Army perished, literally recapitu—
lating the fate of Samsonov‘s Russian Second Army in World War I, having
been just as insanely thrown into encirclement.

Now this, of course, was treason to the Motherland! This, of course, was
vicious, self—obsessed betrayal! But it was Stalin‘s. Treason does not necessarily
involve selling out for money. It can include ignorance and carelessness in the
preparations for war, confusion and cowardice at its very start, the meaningless
sacrifice of armies and corps solely for the sake of saving one‘s own marshal‘s
uniform. Indeed, what more bitter treason is there on the part of a Supreme
Commander in Chief?

Unlike Samsonov, Vlasov did not commit suicide. After his army had been
wiped out, he wandered among the woods and swamps and, on July 6, per—
sonally surrendered in the area of Siverskaya. He was taken to the German
headquarters near Lotzen in East Prussia, where they were holding several
captured generals and a brigade political commissar, G. N. Zhilenkov, formerly
a successful Party official and secretary of one of the Moscow District Party
Committees. These captives had already confessed their disagreement with the
policy of the Stalin government. But they had no real leader. Vlasov became it.

9. In reality there was no Russian Liberation Army until almost the very
end of the war. Both the name and the insignia devised for it were invented
by a German of Russian origin, Captain Strik—Strikfeldt, in the Ost—Propaganda—
Abteilung. Although he held only a minor position, he had influence, and he
tried to convince the Hitlerite leadership that a German—Russian alliance was
essential and that the Russians should be encouraged to collaborate with Ger—
many. A vain undertaking for both sides! Each side wanted only to use and
deceive the other. But, in the given situation, the Germans had power—they
were on top of the setup. And the Vlasov officers had only their fantasy—at
the bottom of the abyss. There was no such army, but anti—Soviet formations
made up of Soviet citizens were organized from the very start of the war. The
first to support the Germans were the Lithuanians. In the one year we had
been there we had aroused their deep, angry hostility! And then the SS—Galicia
Division was created from Ukrainian volunteers. And Estonian units afterward.
In the fall of 1941, guard companies appeared in Byelorussia And a Tatar
battalion in the Crimea. We ourselves had sowed the seeds of all this! Take,
