The Interrogation | 113

method and did not require the posting of sentries. In all the
interrogation prisons the prisoners were forbidden to sleep even
one minute from reveille till taps. (In Sukhanovka and several
other prisons used specifically for interrogation, the cot was
folded into the wall during the day; in others, the prisoners were
simply forbidden to lie down, and even to close their eyes while
seated.) Since the major interrogations were all conducted at
night, it was automatic: whoever was undergoing interrogation
got no sleep for at least five days and nights. (Saturday and Sun—
day nights, the interrogators themselves tried to get some rest.)

22. The above method was further implemented by an as—
sembly line of interrogators. Not only were you not allowed to
sleep, but for three or four days shifts of interrogators kept up a
continuous interrogation.

23. The bedbug—infested box has already been mentioned. In
the dark closet made of wooden planks, there were hundreds,
maybe even thousands, of bedbugs, which had been allowed to
multiply. The guards removed the prisoner‘s jacket or field
shirt, and immediately the hungry bedbugs assaulted him, crawl—
ing onto him from the walls or falling off the ceiling. At first he
waged war with them strenuously, crushing them on his body
and on the walls, suffocated by their stink. But after several
hours he weakened and let them drink his blood without a
murmur.

24. Punishment cells. No matter how hard it was in the
ordinary cell, the punishment cells were always worse. And on
return from there the ordinary cell always seemed like paradise.
In the punishment cell a human being was systematically worn
down by starvation and also, usually, by cold. (In Sukhanovka
Prison there were also hot punishment cells.) For example, the
Lefortovo punishment cells were entirely unheated. There were
radiators in the corridor only, and in this "heated" corridor the
guards on duty walked in felt boots and padded jackets. The
prisoner was forced to undress down to his underwear, and
sometimes to his undershorts, and he was forced to spend from
three to five days in the punishment cell without moving (since
it was so confining). He received hot gruel on the third day only.
For the first few minutes you were convinced you‘d not be able
to last an hour. But, by some miracle, a human being would in—
