182 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

Sukhanovka was a former monastery, dating back to Catherine
the Great. It consisted of two buildings—one in which prisoners
served out their terms, and the other a structure that contained
sixty—eight monks‘ cells and was used for interrogations. The
journey there in a Black Maria took two hours, and only a hand—
ful of people knew that the prison was really just a few miles
from Lenin‘s Gorki estate and near the former estate of Zinaida
Volkonskaya. The countryside surrounding it was beautiful.

There they stunned the newly arrived prisoner with a stand—up
punishment cell again so narrow that when he was no longer
able to stand he had to sag, supported by his bent knees propped
against the wall. There was no alternative. They kept prisoners
thus for more than a day to break their resistance. But they ate
tender, tasty food at Sukhanovka, which was like nothing else
in the MGB—because it was brought in from the Architects‘
Rest Home. They didn‘t maintain a separate kitchen to prepare
hogwash. However, the amount one architect would eat—includ—
ing fried potatoes and meatballs—was divided among twelve
prisoners. As a result the prisoners were not only always hungry
but also exceedingly irritable.

The cells were all built for two, but prisoners under interroga—
tion were usually kept in them singly. The dimensions were five
by six and a half feet." Two little round stools were welded to
the stone floor, like stumps, and at night, if the guard unlocked

3. To be absolutely precise, they were 156 centimeters by 209 centimeters.
How do we know? Through a triumph of engineering calculation and a strong
heart that even Sukhanovka could not break. The measurements were the work
of Alexander D., who would not allow them to drive him to madness or despair.
He resisted by striving to use his mind to calculate distances. In Lefortovo he
counted steps, converted them into kilometers, remembered from a map how
many kilometers it was from Moscow to the border, and then how many across
all Europe, and how many across the Atlantic Ocean. He was sustained in this
by the hope of returning to America. And in one year in Lefortovo solitary he
got, so to speak, halfway across the Atlantic. Thereupon they took him to Su—
khanovka. Here, realizing how few would survive to tell of it—and all our in—
formation about it comes from him—he invented a method of measuring the
cell. The numbers 10/22 were stamped on the bottom of his prison bowl, and
he guessed that "10" was the diameter of the bottom and "22" the diameter of
the outside edge. Then he pulled a thread from a towel, made himself a tape
measure, and measured everything with it. Then he began to invent a way of
sleeping standing up, propping his knees against the small chair, and of deceiv—
ing the guard into thinking his eyes were open. He succeeded in this deception,
and that was how he managed not to go insane when Ryumin kept him sleepless
for a month.
