The Ships of the Archipelago | 493

you will agree he is not off on a jaunt to visit his mother—in—law,
and there is no reason in the world to treat him so well that people
out in freedom would envy him. We have problems with our
transportation: he‘ll get there all right, and he won‘t die on the
way either.

Since the fifties, when railroad timetables were actually
straightened out, the prisoners haven‘t had to travel in this fashion
for very long at a time—say, a day and a half or two days. During
and after the war, things were worse. From Petropavlovsk (in
Kazakhstan) to Karaganda, a Stolypin car might be seven days
en route (with twenty—five people in a compartment). From
Karaganda to Sverdlovsk it could be eight days (with up to twenty—
six in a compartment). Even just going from Kuibyshev to Chel—
yabinsk in August, 1945, Susi traveled in a Stolypin car for
several days, and their compartment held thirty—five people lying
on top of one another, floundering, fighting.* And in the autumn
of 1946 N. V. Timofeyev—Ressovsky traveled from Petropavlovsk
to Moscow in a compartment that had thirty—six people in it! For
several days he hung suspended between other human beings and
his legs did not touch the floor. Then they started to die off—
and the guards hauled the corpses out from under their feet.
(Not right away, true; only on the second day.) That way things
became less crowded. The whole trip to Moscow continued in this
fashion for three weeks.

Was thirty—six the upper limit for a Stolypin compartment? I
have no evidence available on thirty—seven or higher, and yet,
adhering to our one—and—only scientific method, and remembering
the necessity to struggle against "the limiters," we are compelled
to reply: No, no, no! It is not a limit! Perhaps in some other
country it would be an upper limit, but not here! As long as there
are any cubic centimeters of unbreathed air left in the compart—
ment, even if it be beneath the upper shelves, even if between
shoulders, legs, and heads, the compartment is ready to take ad—
ditional prisoners. One might, however, conditionally accept

1. Does this perhaps satisfy those who are astonished and reproachful be—
cause people didn‘t fight?

2. When he got to Moscow, a miracle took place in accordance with the
laws of the country of miracles. Officers carried Timofeyev—Ressovsky from
the prisoner transport in their arms, and he was driven away in an ordinary
automobile: he was off to advance science!
