The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 67

changed thoughts—in other words we were the beginnings of

an organization, in other words an organization!

Section 12 concerned itself closely with the conscience of our
citizens: it dealt with the failure to make a denunciation of any
action of the types listed. And the penalty for the mortal sin of
failure to make a denunciation carried no maximum limit!

This section was in itself such a fantastic extension of
everything else that no further extension was needed. He knew
and he did not tell became the equivalent of "He did it himself"!
Section 13, presumably long since out of date, had to do with

service in the Tsarist secret police—the Okhrana."" (A subse—
quent form of analogous service was, on the contrary, considered
patriotic. )

Section 14 stipulated the penalties for "conscious failure to
carry out defined duties or intentionally careless execution of
same." In brief this was called "sabotage" or "economic counter—
revolution"—and the penalties, of course, included execution.

Tt was only the interrogator who, after consulting his revolu—
tionary sense of justice, could separate what was intentional
from what was unintentional. This section was applied to
peasants who failed to come across with food deliveries. It
was also applied to collective farmers who failed to work the
required minimum number of "labor days"; to camp prisoners
who failed to complete their work norms; and, in a peculiar
ricochet, after the war it came to be applied to members of
Russia‘s organized underworld of thieves, the blatnye or blatari,
for escaping from camp. In other words, by an extension, a
thief‘s flight from camp was interpreted as subversion of the
camp system rather than as a dash to freedom.

Such was the last rib of the fan of Article 58—a fan whose
spread encompassed all human existence.

Now that we have completed our review of this great Article
of the Criminal Code, we are less likely to be astounded further
on. Wherever the law is, crime can be found.

32. There are psychological bases for suspecting I. Stalin of having been
liable under this section of Article 58 also, By no means all the documents relat—
ing to this type of service survived February, 1917, to become matters of
public knowledge. V. F. Dzhunkovsky a former Tsarist police director, who
died in the Kolyma, declared that the hasty burning of police archives in the

first days of the February Revolution was a joint effort on the part of certain
self—interested revolutionaries.
