154 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

There‘s no end to such cases. One could issue a thousand
"White Papers" (and beginning in 1918 too). One would need
only to question systematically former prisoners and their wives.
Maybe there are and were bluecaps who never stole anything or
appropriated anything for themselves—but I find it impossible
to imagine one. I simply do not understand: given the bluecaps‘
philosophy of life, what was there to restrain them if they liked
some particular thing? Way back at the beginning of the thirties,
when all of us were marching around in the German uniforms of
the Red Youth Front and were building the First Five—Year Plan,
they were spending their evenings in salons like the one in the
apartment of Konkordiya TIosse, behaving like members of the
nobility or Westerners, and their lady friends were showing off
their foreign clothes. Where were they getting those clothes?

Here are their family names—and one might almost think
they were hired because of those names. For example, in the
Kemerovo Provincial State Security Administration, there were:
a prosecutor named Trutnev, "drone"; a chief of the interroga—
tion section Major Shkurkin, "self—server‘"; his deputy, Lieutenant
Colonel Balandin, "soupy"; and an interrogator Skorokhvatov,
"quick—grabber." When all is said and done, one could not invent
names more appropriate. And they were all right there together!
(I need hardly bother to mention again Volkopyalov—"wolf—
skin—stretcher"—or Grabishchenko—‘"plunderer.") Are we to
assume that nothing at all is expressed in people‘s family names
and such a concentration of them?

Again the prisoner‘s faulty memory. I. Korneyev has forgotten
the name of the colonel of State Security who was also Kon—
kordiya Tosse‘s friend (they both knew her, it turned out), who
was in the Vladimir Detention Prison at the same time as
Korneyev. This colonel was a living embodiment of the instincts
for power and personal gain. At the beginning of 1945, during
the height of the "war booty" period, he got himself assigned
to that section of the Organs, headed by Abakumov himself,
which was supposed to keep watch over the plundering—in other
words, they tried to grab off as much as possible for themselves,
not for the state. (And succeeded brilliantly.) Our hero pulled
in whole freight car loads and built several dachas, one of them
in Klin. After the war he operated on such a scale that when he
arrived at the Novosibirsk Station he ordered all the customers
