174 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

tion and the spiritual strength of Shakespeare‘s evildoers stopped
short at a dozen corpses. Because they had no ideology.

Ideology—that is what gives evildoing its long—sought justifica—
tion and gives the evildoer the necessary steadfastness and deter—
mination. That is the social theory which helps to make his acts
seem good instead of bad in his own and others‘ eyes, so that he
won‘t hear reproaches and curses but will receive praise and
honors. That was how the agents of the Inquisition fortified their
wills: by invoking Christianity; the conquerors of foreign lands,
by extolling the grandeur of their Motherland; the colonizers, by
civilization; the Nazis, by race; and the Jacobins (early and late),
by equality, brotherhood, and the happiness of future generations.

Thanks to ideology, the twentieth century was fated to experi—
ence evildoing on a scale calculated in the millions. This cannot
be denied, nor passed over, nor suppressed. How, then, do we
dare insist that evildoers do not exist? And who was it that de—
stroyed these millions? Without evildoers there would have been
no Archipelago.

There was a rumor going the rounds between 1918 and 1920
that the Petrograd Cheka, headed by Uritsky, and the Odessa
Cheka, headed by Deich, did not shoot all those condemned to
death but fed some of them alive to the animals in the city zoos.
I do not know whether this is truth or calumny, or, if there were
any such cases, how many there were. But I wouldn‘t set out to
look for proof, either. Following the practice of the bluecaps, I
would propose that they prove to us that this was impossible.
How else could they get food for the zoos in those famine years?
Take it away from the working class? Those enemies were going
to die anyway, so why couldn‘t their deaths support the zoo
economy of the Republic and thereby assist our march into the
future? Wasn‘t it expedient?

That is the precise line the Shakespearean evildoer could not
cross. But the evildoer with ideology does cross it, and his eyes
remain dry and clear.

Physics is aware of phenomena which occur only at threshold
magnitudes, which do not exist at all until a certain threshold
encoded by and known to nature has been crossed. No matter
how intense a yellow light you shine on a lithium sample, it will
not emit electrons. But as soon as a weak bluish light begins to
glow, it does emit them. (The threshold of the photoelectric effect
