The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 49

wrath? Where had all our terrible accusations gone to? At this
very moment, as it happened, a trial of "wreckers" in the porcelain
industry was under way (they had been playing their filthy tricks
even there!). All the defendants had damned each other in unison
and confessed to everything—and suddenly they cried out in
unison again: "We are innocent!" And they were freed!

(There was even a small reverse wave to be remarked in this
particular year: some engineers who had already been sentenced
or put under interrogation were released. Thus D. A. Rozhansky
came back. Should we not say he had won his duel with Stalin?
And that if people had been heroic in exercising their civil re—
sponsibilities, there would never have been any reason to write
either this chapter or this whole book?)

That same year Stalin was still engaged in grinding beneath his
hoof the long—since prostrate Mensheviks. (There was a public
trial in March, 1931, of the "All—Union Bureau of Mensheviks,"
Groman, Sukhanov,*" and Yakubovich, and a certain number of
small, scattered, unannounced arrests took place in addition.)

And suddenly Stalin "reconsidered."

The White Sea folk say of the tide, the water reconsiders,
meaning the moment just before it begins to fall. Well, of course,
it is inappropriate to compare the murky soul of Stalin with the
water of the White Sea. And perhaps he didn‘t reconsider any—
thing whatever. Nor was there any ebb tide. But one more miracle
happened that year. In 1931, following the trial of the Prom—
party, a grandiose trial of the Working Peasants Party was being
prepared—on the grounds that they existed (never, in actual
fact!) as an enormous organized underground force among the
rural intelligentsia, including leaders of consumer and agricultural
cooperatives and the more advanced upper layer of the peas—
antry, and supposedly were preparing to overthrow the dictator—
ship of the proletariat. At the trial of the Promparty this Working
Peasants Party—the TKP—was referred to as if it were already
well known and under detention. The interrogation apparatus of

22. The Sukhanov referred to here was the same Sukhanov in whose apart—
ment, on the Karpovka, in Petrograd, and with whose knowledge (and the
guides there nowadays are lying when they say it was without his knowledge),

the Bolshevik Central Committee met on October 10, 1917, and adopted its
decision to launch an armed uprising.
