The Law Matures | 393

decisions could be avoided, and squandered, scattered millions
could be picked up from the ground. To defend quality—"the
heart of technology"—amid the general uproar about quantity,
planning, and overplanning. And to indoctrinate students with
this spirit.

That‘s what it was, the thin, delicate fabric of the truth. That
is what it really was.

But to utter such thoughts aloud in 1930 meant being shot.

And yet it was still too little and too invisible to arouse the
wrath of the mob.

It was therefore necessary to reprocess the silent and redeem—
ing collusion of the engineers into crude wrecking and inter—
vention.

Thus, in the picture they substituted, we nonetheless caught
a fleshless—and fruitless—vision of the truth. The work of the
stage director began to fall apart. Fedotov had already blurted
out something about sleepless nights (!) during the eight months
of his imprisonment; and about some important official of the
GPU who had recently shaken his hand (?) (so there must have
been a deal: you play your roles, and the GPU will carry out its
promises?). And even the witnesses, though their role was in—
comparably less important, began to get confused.

Krylenko: "Did you participate in this group?"

Witness Kirpotenko: "Two or three times, when questions
of intervention were being considered."

And that was just what was needed!

Krylenko (encouragingly): "Go on."

Kirpotenko (a pause): "Other than that nothing is known."

Krylenko urges him on, tries to give him his cue again.

Kirpotenko (stupidly): "Other than intervention nothing is
known to me."*"

Then, when there was an actual confrontation with Kupri—
yanov, the facts no longed jibed. Krylenko got angry, and he
shouted at the inept prisoners:

"Then you just have to fix things so you come up with the same
answers."

And in the recess, behind the scenes, everything was once
more brought up to snuff. All the defendants were once again
nervously awaiting their cues. And Krylenko prompted all eight

22. Ibid., p. 354.
