114 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

deed sit out his five days, perhaps. acquiring in the course of it
an illness that would last him the rest of his life.

There were various aspects to punishment cells—as, for in—
stance, dampness and water. In the Chernovtsy Prison after the
war, Masha G. was kept barefooted for two hours and up to her
ankles in icy water—confess! (She was eighteen years old, and
how she feared for her feet! She was going to have to live with
them a long time.)

25. Should one consider it a variation of the punishment cell
when a prisoner was locked in an alcove? As long ago as 1933
this was one of the ways they tortured S. A. Chebotaryev in the —
Khabarovsk GPU. They locked him naked in a concrete alcove
in such a way that he could neither bend his knees, nor straighten
up and change the position of his arms, nor turn his head. And
that was not all! They began to drip cold water onto his scalp—
a classic torture—which then ran down his body in rivulets.
They did not inform him, of course, that this would go on for
only twenty—four hours. It was awful enough at any rate for him
to lose consciousness, and he was discovered the next day ap—
parently dead. He came to on a hospital cot. They had brought
him out of his faint with spirits of ammonia, caffeine, and body
massage. At first he had no recollection of where he had been,
or what had happened. For a whole month he was useless even
for interrogation. (We may be so bold as to assume that this
alcove and dripping device had not been devised for Chebotaryev
alone. In 1949 my Dnepropetrovsk acquaintance had been
similarly confined, without the dripping attachment, however.
On a line joining Khabarovsk and Dnepropetrovsk, and over a
period of sixteen years, were there not other such points as
well?)

26. Starvation has already been mentioned in combination
with other methods. Nor was it an unusual method: to starve the
prisoner into confession. Actually, the starvation technique, like
interrogation at night, was an integral element in the entire
system of coercion. The miserly prison bread ration, amounting
to ten and a half ounces in the peacetime year of 1933, and to .
one pound in 1945 in the Lubyanka, and permitting or pro—
hibiting food parcels from one‘s family and access to the commis—
sary, were universally applied to everyone. But there was also
