520 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

Ivan had a letter of credit sewn in his clothes. He got a ticket
to the Kuban. However, en route to Moscow he got very drunk
in a restaurant. Consequently, he squinched up his eyes at Moscow
as they were leaving the station, and told the taxi driver: "Take
me to an embassy!" "Which one?" "Who the hell cares? Any
one." And the driver took him to one: "Which one is that?" "The
French." "All right."

Perhaps his thoughts got mixed up, and his original intentions
in going to an embassy had changed into something else, but his
cleverness and his strength had in no wise lapsed: without alerting
the policemen at the embassy entrance, he went quietly down a
side street and climbed to the top of a smooth wall double a man‘s
height. In the embassy yard it was easier: no one discovered him
or detained him, and he went on inside, walked through one
room, then another, and he saw a table set. There were many
things on the table, but what astonished him most was the pears.
He felt a yen for them, and he stuffed all the pockets in his field
jacket and trousers with them. At that moment, the members of
the household came in to dine. Koverchenko began to attack
them and shout at them before they could begin on him: "You
Frenchmen!" According to him, France hadn‘t done anything
good for the last century. "Why don‘t you start a revolution?
Why are you trying to get de Gaulle into power? And you want
us to send our Kuban wheat to you? It‘s no go." "Who are you?
Where did you come from?" The French were astounded. Im—
mediately adopting the right approach, Koverchenko kept his wits
about him: "A major of the MGB." The French were frightened.
"But even so, you are not supposed to burst in here. What is your
business here?" "———— you in the mouth!" Koverchenko bel—
lowed at them straight from the heart. And, after playing the
hoodlum for them a while longer, he noticed that in the next room
they were already telephoning about him. He was still sober
enough to begin his retreat, but the pears started to fall out of
his pockets—and he was pursued by mocking laughter.

And in actual fact, he had enough strength left not only to
leave the embassy safe and sound but to move on. The next morn—
ing he woke up in Kiev Station (was he not planning to go on to
the West Ukraine?), and they soon picked him up there.

During his interrogation he was beaten by Abakumov person—
ally. And the scars on his back swelled up to a hand‘s breadth.
