86 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

A certain number of Poles, members of the Home Army, fol—
lowers of Mikolajezyk, arrived in Gulag in 1945 via our prisons.
There were a certain number of Rumanians and Hungarians.

At war‘s end and for many years after, there flowed uninter—
ruptedly an abundant wave of Ukrainian nationalists (the "Ban—
derovtsy").

Against the background of this enormous postwar displace—
ment of millions, few paid much attention to such small waves as:

e Foreigners‘ girl friends (in 1946—1947)—in other words,
Soviet girls who went out with foreigners. They sentenced these
girls under Article 7—35—SOE—Socially Dangerous Element.

e Spanish children—the same children who had been taken
from their homeland during the Spanish Civil War, but who
were adults by the end of World War II. Raised in our board—
ing schools, they nonetheless fitted very poorly into our life.
Many longed to go "home." They, too, were given 7—35—SOE
—Socially Dangerous Element. And those who were particu—
larly stubborn got 58—6—espionage on behalf of America.

(In fairness we must not forget the brief reverse wave of priests
in 1947. Yes, a miracle! For the first time in thirty years they
freed priests! They didn‘t actually go about seeking them out in
camps, but whenever a priest was known to people in freedom,
and whenever a name and exact location could be provided, the
individual priests in question were sent out to freedom in order to
strengthen the church, which at that time was being revived.)

We have to remind our readers once again that this chapter
does not attempt by any means to list all the waves which fertilized
Gulag—but only those which had a political coloration. And
just as, in a course in physiology, after a detailed description of
the circulation of the blood, one can begin over again and de—
scribe in detail the lymphatic system, one could begin again and
describe the waves of nonpolitical offenders and habitual criminals
from 1918 to 1953. And this description, too, would run long.
It would bring to light many famous decrees, now in part for—
