388 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

of his own life, and what his relationship to the Revolution had
been, and how he was led to participate in wrecking.

And, in one fell swoop, that thoughtless insertion, that human
picture, spoiled all five acts.

The first thing that we learn to our astonishment is that all
eight of these big shots of the bourgeois intelligentsia came from
poor families: the son of a peasant; one of the many children
of a clerk; the son of an artisan; the son of a rural schoolteacher;
the son of a peddler. At school, they were all impoverished and
earned the money for their education themselves, from the ages
of twelve, thirteen, and fourteen. Some gave lessons, and some
worked on locomotives. And here was what was monstrous: no
one barred their way to an education! They all completed the
courses in high school and in higher technological institutions,
and they became important and famous professors. (How could
that have been? They always told us that under Tsarism only the
children of landowners and capitalists . . . Those calendars cer—
tainly couldn‘t have been lying!)

And here and now, in the Soviet period, engineers were in a
very difficult position. It was almost impossible for them to
provide their children with a higher education (after all, the
children of the intelligentsia had the lowest priority, remember!).
The court didn‘t argue, nor did Krylenko. (And the defendants
themselves hastened to qualify what they had said, asserting that,
against the background of the general and over—all victories, this,
of course, was unimportant.)

Here we begin to distinguish bit by bit among the defendants,
who, up to this point, had talked very much like one another.
Their age differential also divided them with respect to probity.
Those close to sixty and older made statements that aroused a
friendly, sympathetic reaction. But forty—three—year—old Ramzin
and Larichev, and thirty—nine—year—old Ochkin (the same one
who had denounced Glavtop—the Main Fuels Committee—in
1921), were glib and shameless. And all the major testimony
about the Promparty and intervention comes from them. Ramzin
was the kind of person (as a result of his early and extraordinary
successes) who was shunned by the entire engineering profession,
and he endured it. At the trial he caught Krylenko‘s hints on the
wing and volunteered precise statements. All the charges were
