416 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

among the leaders. Ordzhonikidze put his hand up to his ear
(he was hard of hearing): "See here, are you giving all this
testimony voluntarily?" (Note that down! Ordzhonikidze will get
a bullet of his own!) "Absolutely voluntarily"—and Pyatakov
swayed on his feet. And during the recess, Rykov said to Bu—
kharin: "Tomsky had will power. He understood it all back in
August, and he ended his own life. While you and I, like fools,
have gone on living."

At this point Kaganovich made an angry, condemnatory speech
(he wanted so much to believe in Bukharchik‘s innocence, but
he couldn‘t any longer). And then Molotov, And then Stalin‘
What a generous heart! What a memory for the good things!
"Nonetheless, I consider that Bukharin‘s guilt has not yet been
proven. Perhaps Rykov is guilty, but not Bukharin." (Someone
had drawn up charges against Bukharin against his will! )

From cold to hot. That‘s how will power collapses. That‘s how
to .grow used to the role of a ruined hero.

And then they began to bring to his home day after day the
records of interrogations: the depositions of young ex—students in
the Institute of Red Professors, of Radek, and all the rest of
them. And they all provided the gravest proofs of Bukharin‘s
black treason. They took these documents to his home, not as
if he were a defendant—oh, by no means! Merely in his position
as a member of the Central Committee—merely for his informa—
tion.

Usually, when he received a new batch of these materials, Bu—
kharin would say to his twenty—two—year—old wife, who only that
spring had given him a son: "You read them. I can‘t." And he
would bury his head in his pillow. He had two revolvers at home.
(Stalin was giving him time too.) And yet he did not commit
suicide.

Is it not clear that he had grown used to his ordained role?

And one more public trial took place. And they shot one more
batch of defendants. And yet they continued to be merciful to
Bukharin. They had not taken Bukharin.

At the beginning of February, 1937, he decided to go on a
hunger strike at home, in order to force the Central Committee
to hold a hearing and clear him of the charges against him. He
announced it in a letter to "Dear Koba," and he honestly went
