172 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

—and why did the words of an insignificant prisoner touch them
so near the quick?

That same D. Terekhov I mentioned earlier remembers to this
day the first prisoner he sentenced to death. "I was sorry for him."
His memory obviously clings to something that came from his
heart. (But after that first one, he forgot many and no longer
kept count any more. )*

No matter how icy the jailers in the Big House in Leningrad,
the innermost nucleus of the nucleus of the heart—for a nucleus
has its own nucleus—had to continue to exist, did it not?
N. P. va recalls the time when she was being taken to inter—
rogation by an impassive, silent woman guard with unseeing eyes
—when suddenly the bombs began to explode right next to the
Big House and it sounded as if at the next moment they would
fall directly on them. The terrified guard threw her arms around
her prisoner and embraced her, desperate for human companion—
ship and sympathy. Then the bombing stopped. And her eyes
became unseeing again. "Hands behind your back! Move along."

Well, of course, there was no great merit in that—to become
a human being at the moment of death. Similarly, loving one‘s
own children is no proof of virtue. (People often try to excuse
scoundrels by saying: "He‘s a good family man!") The Chairman
of the Supreme Court, I. T. Golyakov, is praised: he enjoyed
digging in his garden, he loved books, he used to browse around
used— and rare—book stores, he knew the work of Tolstoi, Koro—
lenko, and Chekhov. Well, what did he learn from them? How
many thousands did he destroy? Or, for example, that colonel,
Konkordiya Tosse‘s friend, who had roared with laughter in the
Vladimir Detention Prison at the memory of locking up a group
of old Jews in an ice—filled root cellar, had been afraid of one
thing only during all his debaucheries: that his wife might find
out about them. She believed in him, regarded him as noble, and
this faith of hers was precious to him. But do we dare accept that
feeling as a bridgehead to virtue in his heart?

 

20. An episode with Terekhov: Attempting to prove to me the fairness of the
judicial system under Khrushchev, he energetically struck the plate—glass desk
top with his hand and cut his wrist on the edge. He rang for help. His subordi—
nates were at the ready. The senior officer on duty brought him iodine and
hydrogen peroxide. Continuing the conversation, he helplessly held dampened
cotton to the wound: it appears that his blood coagulates poorly. And thus
God showed him clearly the limitations of the human being! And he had de—
livered verdicts, imposed death sentences on others.
