That Spring | 265

a voice from a world that had disappeared with such finality
that not even the most extravagant fantasy could have projected
that invisible point in the soundless corridors of the Big Lub—
yanka where his steps would intersect my own before twenty years
had passed. True, I would not meet the man himself until an—
other twenty years had gone by. But I had time to study attentively
many émigrés, old and young, in the spring of 1945.

I underwent a medical examination with Captain Borshch and
Colonel Mariyushkin. And the pitiful sight of their naked,
wrinkled, dark—yellow bodies, not bodies any longer but mum—
mies, has always remained before my eyes. They were arrested
five minutes this side of the grave, so to speak, and brought to
Moscow from several thousand miles away, and there in Mos—
cow, in 1945, an interrogation was proceeding in the most
serious way on . . . their struggle against Soviet power in 1919!

We have become so used to the piling up of injustices during
interrogation and trial that we have ceased drawing any dis—
tinctions of degree between them. This captain and this colonel
were veteran officers of the Tsar‘s Russian Army. They had both
been over forty, and they had both served in the army for
twenty years, when the telegraph brought them news that the
Tsar had been overthrown in Petrograd. For twenty years they
had served the Tsar according to their oath. And now, against
their wills—for all we know, possibly muttering "Beat it! Scram!"
to themselves—they swore loyalty to the Provisional Govern—
ment. After that, no one asked them to swear any more oaths
because the whole army fell apart. They didn‘t like the new
scheme of things, wherein soldiers tore shoulder boards off offi—
cers and killed them, and it was natural for them to join other
officers to fight against it. And it was natural for the Red Army
to fight against them and push them into the sea. But in a coun—
try in which at least the rudiments of jurisprudence exist, what
basis was there for putting them on trial, and a quarter of a cen—
tury later at that? (They had lived as private persons all that
time . . . Mariyushkin up to the very moment of his arrest.
Borshch, to be sure, had turned up in a Cossack wagon train in
Austria, but in a transport, with the old men and women, not in
an armed unit.)

However, in 1945, in the very center of Soviet jurisdiction,
