The Law Matures | 431

of the convoy gave the command: "Arms at the ready!" And
thirty police carbines and the pistols of the local NKVD men
were aimed at the defendants and at the crowd. (It seemed at the
time as though the crowd would rush forward to free the de—
fendants.)

The hall was lit only by a few kerosene lamps, and the semi—
darkness heightened the general confusion and fear. The crowd,
finally convinced, not so much by the trial as by the carbines now
leveled at it, pushed in a panic against the doors and windows.
The wood cracked and broke; glass tinkled. Univer‘s wife, in a
dead faint, was almost trampled to death and was left lying be—
neath the chairs until morning.

And there never was any applause.*

And not only couldn‘t the condemned prisoners be shot then
and there, but they had to be kept under —even stricter guard,
because now they really had nothing at all to lose, and they had to
be taken to the provincial capital for execution.

They managed to cope with the first problem—sending them
off by night to the NKVD along the main street—by having each
condemned man guarded by five men. One of the guards carried
a lantern. One went ahead with a pistol at the ready. Two held the
condemned prisoner by the arms and kept their pistols in their
free hands. The fifth brought up the rear, with his pistol pointed
at the condemned man‘s back.

The rest of the police were ranged in formation in order to
prevent any attack by the crowd.

Every reasonable man will now agree that the NKVD could
never have carried out its great assignment if they had fussed
about with open trials.

And that is why public political trials never really put down
roots in our country.

41. One little note on eight—year—old Zoya Vlasova. She loved her father
intensely. She could no longer go to school. (They teased her: "Your papa is
a wrecker!" She would get in a fight: "My papa is good!") She lived only one
year after the trial. Up to then she had never been ill. During that year she
did not once smile; she went about with head hung low, and the old women
prophesied: "She keeps looking at the earth; she is going to die soon." She
died of inflammation of the brain, and as she was dying she kept calling out:
"Where is my papa? Give me my papa!‘" When we count up the millions of
those who perished in the camps, we forget to multiply them by two, by three.
