246 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

Soviet regime, and appealed to prisoners to enlist in spy schools
or in Vlasov units.

People who have never starved as our war prisoners did, who
have never gnawed on bats that happened to fly into the barracks,
who have never had to boil the soles of old shoes, will never
understand the irresistible material force exerted by any kind
of appeal, any kind of argument whatever, if behind it, on the
other side of the camp gates, smoke rises from a field kitchen, and
if everyone who signs up is fed a bellyful of kasha right then and
there—if only once! Just once more before I die!

And hovering over the steaming kasha and the inducements of
the recruiter was the apparition of freedom and a real life—
wherever it might call! To the Vlasov battalions. To the Cossack
regiments of Krasnov. To the labor battalions—pouring cement
in the future Atlantic Wall. To the fjords of Norway. To the
sands of Libya. To the "Hiwi" units ("Hilfswillige"—volunteers
in the German Wehrmacht—there being twelve "Hiwi" men in
each German company). And then, finally, to the village Polizei,
who pursued and caught partisans—many of whom the Mother—
land would also renounce. Wherever it might call, any place at
all, at least anything so as not to stay there and die like abandoned
cattle.

We ourselves released from every obligation, not merely to his
Motherland but to all humanity, the human being whom we
drove to gnawing on bats.

And those of our boys who agreed to become half—baked spies
still had not drawn any drastic conclusions from their abandoned
state; they were still, in fact, acting very patriotically. They saw
this course as the least difficult means of getting out of POW
camp. Almost to a man, they decided that as soon as the Germans
sent them across to the Soviet side, they would turn themselves
in to the authorities, turn in their equipment and instructions,
and join their own benign command in laughing at the stupid
Germans. They would then put on their Red Army uniforms and
return to fight bravely in their units. And tell me, who, speaking
in human terms, could have expected anything else? How could it
have been any other way? These were straightforward, sincere
men. I saw many of them. They had honest round faces and spoke
with an attractive Vyatka or Vladimir accent. They boldly joined
