Tyurzak | 481

Under one, in 1947—1948, personal articles were not removed
from the cell; one could lie down during the day; and the turnkey
very seldom looked through the peephole. But under the other,
in 1949—1953, the cell was locked with two locks (the respon—
sibility of the turnkey and duty officer respectively); one was for—
bidden to lie down, forbidden to talk in a normal voice (in
Kazan, only in a whisper); personal articles were all taken away;
a uniform of striped mattress ticking was issued; correspondence
was permitted only twice a year and only on those days announced
without warning by the chief of the prison (anyone who missed
that day couldn‘t write), and only a sheet of paper half the size
of a postal sheet could be used; violent searches and unscheduled
visits were frequent, requiring the complete turning out of one‘s
belongings and undressing down to one‘s skin. Communication
between cells was prohibited to such an extent that the jailers
went through the toilets with a portable lantern after each toilet
visit and searched in each hole. The entire cell would get punish—
ment cells for graffiti in the toilets. The punishment cells were a
scourge in the Special Purpose Prisons. One could get into a
punishment cell for coughing. ("Cover your head with your
blanket. Then you can cough!") Or for walking around the cell
(Kozyrev: "It was considered to be rebellious"); for the noise
made by one‘s shoes. (In the Kazan Prison women had been
issued men‘s shoes that were much too large for women‘s feet—
size 10%.) Incidentally, Ginzburg was correct in concluding
that periods in a punishment cell were meted out not for any
particular misdemeanor but according to a schedule: every pri—
soner was required to spend some time there in order to learn
what it was like. And the rules included another generally appli—
cable point: "In the event of any display of unruliness in a punish—
ment cell [?], the chief of the prison has the right to extend the
term of incarceration there to twenty days." Just what was meant
by unruliness? Here‘s what happened to Kozyrev. (The descrip—
tions of the punishment cell and much else in the prison regimen
tally to such an extent among all sources that the stamp of a
single system of administrative rules can be detected.) He was
given another five days in the punishment cell for pacing back
and forth. In the autumn, the building containing the punishment
cells was unheated, and it was very cold. They forced prisoners
