The Slave Caravans | 567

Long—handled wooden mallets had to be procured. A passenger
car had to be hooked on for the staff, and if there wasn‘t one,
then instead heated freight cars had to be prepared for the chief
of convoy, the Security officer, and the convoy. Kitchens had to
be built—for the convoy and for the prisoners. And only after
all this had been done was it all right to walk along the cattle
cars and chalk on the sides: "Special Equipment" or "Perishable
Goods." (In her chapter, "The Seventh Car," Yevgeniya Ginz—
burg described a transport of red cars very vividly, and her de—
scription largely obviates the necessity of presenting details here. )

The preparation of the train has been completed—and ahead
lies the complicated combat operation of loading the prisoners
into the cars. At this point there are two important and obligatory
objectives:

e to conceal the loading from ordinary citizens
e to terrorize the prisoners

To conceal the loading from the local population was necessary
because approximately a thousand people were being loaded on
the train simultaneously (at least twenty—five cars), and this
wasn‘t your little group from a Stolypin that could be led right
past the townspeople. Everyone knew, of course, that arrests
were being made every day and every hour, but no one was to be
horrified by the sight of large numbers of them together. In Orel
in 1938 you could hardly hide the fact that there was no home in
the city where there hadn‘t been arrests, and weeping women in
their peasant carts blocked the square in front of the Orel Prison
just as in Surikov‘s painting The Execution of the Streltsy. (Oh,
who one day will paint this latter—day tragedy for us? But no one
will. It‘s not fashionable, not fashionable. . . .) But you don‘t
need to show our Soviet people an entire trainload of them col—
lected in one day. (And in Orel that year there were.) And young
people mustn‘t see it either—for young people are our future.
Therefore it was done only at night—and every night, too, each
and every night, and that was the way it went for several months.
The black line of prisoners to be transported was driven from the
prison to the station on foot. (Meanwhile the Black Marias were
busy making new arrests.) True, the women realized, the women
somehow found out, and at night they came to the station from
