The Ships of the Archipelago | 499

time was always short, and so when was there time enough to sort
them out? One of the four compartments was kept for women,
and if the prisoners in the other three were to be sorted out on one
basis or another, the most logical basis would be by destination
so that it would be easier to unload them.

After all, was it because Pontius Pilate wanted to humiliate
him that Christ was crucified between two thieves? It just hap—
pened to be crucifixion day that day—and there was only one
Golgotha, and time was short. And so he was numbered with the
transgressors.

I am afraid even to think what I would have had to suffer if I
had been in the position of a common convict. . . . The convoy
and the transport officers dealt with me and my comrades with
cautious politeness. . . . Being a political, I went to hard labor
in relative comfort—on the transports, I had quarters separate
from the criminal prisoners, and my pood—my thirty—six pounds
—of baggage was moved about on a cart. . ..

. . . Meft out the quotation marks around the above paragraph
to enable the reader to understand things a little better. After all,
quotation marks are always used either for irony or to set some—
thing apart. And without quotation marks the paragraph sounds
wild, does it not?

It was written by P. F. Yakubovich about the nineties of the last
century. His book was recently republished as a sermon on that
dark and dismal age. We learn from it that even on a barge the
political prisoners had special quarters and a special section set
aside for their walks on deck. (The same thing appears in Tol—
stoi‘s Resurrection, in which, furthermore, an outsider, Prince
Nekhlyudov, is allowed to visit the political prisoners in order to
interview them.) And it was only because the "magic word ‘politi—
cal‘ had been left out by mistake" opposite Yakubovich‘s name
on the list (his own words) that he was met at Ust—Kara "by the
hard—labor inspector . . . like an ordinary criminal prisoner—
rudely, provocatively, impudently." However, this misunderstand—
ing was all happily cleared up.

What an unbelievable time! It was almost a crime to mix politi—
