The History of Our Sewage Disposal System | 41

There were three branches: the Moscow branch (Y. Peshkova—
Vinaver); the Kharkov (Sandormirskaya); and the Petrograd.
The one in Moscow behaved itself and was not dissolved until —
1937. The one in Petrograd (the old Narodnik Shevtsov, the
cripple Gartman, and Kocherovsky) adopted an intolerably im—
pudent stance, mixed into political cases, tried to get support
_ from such former inmates of the Schliisselburg Prison as Novorus—
sky, who had been convicted in the same case as Lenin‘s brother,
Aleksandr Ulyanov, and helped not only socialists but also KR‘s
—Counter—Revolutionaries. In 1926 it was shut down and its
leaders were sent into exile.

The years go by, and everything that has not been freshly re—
called to us is wiped from our memory. In the dim distance, we
see the year 1927 as a careless, well—fed year of the still untrun—
cated NEP. But in fact it was tense; it shuddered as newspaper
headlines exploded; and it was considered at the time, and por—
trayed to us then, as the threshold of a war for world revolution.
The assassination of the Soviet ambassador in Warsaw, which
filled whole columns of the papers that June, aroused Mayakovsky
to dedicate four thunderous verses to the subject.

But here‘s bad luck for you: Poland offered an apology; Voi—
kov‘s lone assassin was arrested there—and so how and against
whom was the poet‘s appeal to be directed?""

With cohesion,
construction,
grit,
and repression °

Wring the neck
. of this gang run riot!

Who was to be repressed? Whose neck should be wrung? It was
then that the so—called Voikov draft began. As always happened
when there were incidents of disturbance or tension, they arrested
former people: Anarchists, SR‘s, Mensheviks, and also the intel—

— 19. Evidently, the monarchist in question assassinated Voikov as an act of
private vengeance: it is said that as Urals Provincial Commissar of Foodstuffs,
in July, 1918, P. L. Voikov had directed the destruction of all traces of the
shooting of the Tsar‘s family (the dissection and dismemberment of the corpses,
the cremation of the remains, and the dispersal of the ashes).
