That Spring | 269

for them their Motherland did not exist as a primary geographi—
cal and physical fact. The contemporary printed word was much
more generally accessible to them than to us, but they received
Soviet books in conspicuously small quantities. And they felt
this lack all the more keenly; it seemed to them chiefly respon—
sible for their inability to understand what was most important,
highest, and most beautiful in Soviet Russia; and that the books
they did receive presented a distortion, a lie; were incomplete.
The picture they had of our real life was very, very faint, but
their longing for their Motherland was such that if we had called
on them in 1941 they would all have joined the Red Army, and
it would have been even sweeter for them to die than to survive.
These young people from twenty—five to twenty—seven already
represented and firmly defended several points of view, in defi—
nite conflict with the opinions of the old generals and political
leaders. Thus Igor‘s group was called the "nepredreshentsy‘"——
the "non—prejudgers": they declared that anyone who had not
shared with the Motherland the whole, complex burden of the
past decades had no right to decide anything about the future of
Russia, nor even to presuppose anything, but should simply go
and lend his strength to whatever the people might decide.

We would often lie beside one another on the wooden bunks.
I tried to understand his world as best I could, and our encounter
revealed to me a concept confirmed by later encounters—that
the outflow from Russia of a significant part of her spiritual
forces, which occurred in the Civil War, had deprived us of a
great and important stream of Russian culture. Everyone who
really loves that culture will strive for the reunion of both
streams, the one at home and the tributary abroad. Only then
will our culture attain wholeness. Only then will it reveal its
capacity for benign development.

And I dream of living until that day.

A human being is weak, weak. In the end, that spring, even the
most stubborn of us wanted forgiveness and were ready to give
up a lot for just a little bit more life. An anecdote was current
among us: "What is your last word, accused?" "I beg you to
