The Bluecaps | 169

weren‘t there also some who rose above the Party—who were
good in a general, human sense?

Broadly speaking, they should not have been there. The Organs
avoided employing such people, eliminating them at the recruit—
ment stage. And such people played their hand shrewdly so as
to get out of it." Whoever got in by mistake either adjusted to
the milieu or else was thrown out, or eased out, or even fell
across the rails himself. Still . . . were there no good people left
there?

In Kishinev, a young lieutenant gaybist went to Father Viktor
Shipovalnikov a full month before he was arrested: "Get away
from here, go away, they plan to arrest you!" (Did he do this on
his own, or did his mother send him to warn the priest?) After
the arrest, this young man was assigned to Father Viktor as an
escort guard. And he grieved for him: "Why didn‘t you go
away?"

Or here‘s another. I had a platoon commander named Lieuten—
ant Ovsyannikov. At the front no one was closer to me than he
was. During half the war we ate from the same pot; even under
enemy shellfire we would gulp down our food between explosions,
so the stew wouldn‘t get cold. He was a peasant lad with a clean
soul and a view of life so undistorted that neither officer candidate
school nor being an officer had spoiled him in any degree. He even
did what he could to soften my hard edges in many ways.
Throughout his service as an officer he concentrated on one thing
only: preserving the lives and strength of his soldiers, many of
whom were no longer young. He was the first to tell me what the
Russian villages were like then and what the collective farms were
like. He talked about all this without resentment, without protest,
very simply and straightforwardly—just as a forest pool reflects
the image of a tree and all its branches, even the smallest. He was
deeply shocked by my arrest. He wrote me a combat reference
containing the highest praise and got the divisional commander
to sign it. After he was demobilized he continued to try to help
me, through my relatives. And this, mind you, was in 1947, which
was not very different from 1937. At my interrogation I had
many reasons to be afraid on his account, especially lest they

19. During the war, a certain Leningrad aviator, after being discharged from
the hospital in Ryazan, went to a TB clinic and begged: "Please find something

wrong with me! I‘m under orders to go into the Organs!‘ The radiologists
dreamed up a touch of TB for him—and the Organs dropped him posthaste.
