140 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

heart, of course, fell. That meant he would be working me over all
night long!) But then he would immediately dial the phone num—
ber of his mistress and, in purring tones, make a date with her for
the night. (So: I would be able to get some sleep! I felt relieved.)

Thus it was that the faultless system was moderated only by the
shortcomings of those who carried it out.

Certain of the more curious interrogators used to enjoy using
"empty" interrogations to broaden their knowledge of life. They
might ask the accused prisoner about the front (about those very
German tanks beneath which they never quite managed to find
the time to throw themselves). Or perhaps about the customs of
European countries and lands across the sea which the prisoner
had visited: about the stores and the merchandise sold in them,
and particularly about procedures in foreign whorehouses and
about all kinds of adventures with women.

The Code of Criminal Procedure provided that the prosecutor
was to review continuously the course of every interrogation to
ensure its being conducted correctly. But no one in our time ever
saw him face to face until the so—called "questioning by the
prosecutor," which meant the interrogation was nearing its end.
I, too, was taken to such a "questioning." Lieutenant Colonel
Kotov, a calm, well—nourished, impersonal blond man, who was
neither nasty nor nice but essentially a cipher, sat behind his
desk and, yawning, examined for the first time the file on my case.
He spent fifteen minutes acquainting himself with it while I
watched. (Since this "questioning" was quite unavoidable and
since it was also recorded, there would have been no sense at all
in his studying the file at some earlier, unrecorded time and
then having had to remember details of the case for a certain
number of hours.) Finally, he raised his indifferent eyes to stare
at the wall and asked lazily what I wanted to add to my testimony.

He was required by law to ask what complaints I had about
the conduct of the interrogation and whether coercion had been
used or any violations of my legal rights had occurred. But it
had been a long time since prosecutors asked such questions. And
what if they had? After all, the existence of that entire Ministry
building with its thousands of rooms, and of all five thousand of
the Ministry‘s other interrogation buildings, railroad cars, caves,
and dugouts scattered throughout the Soviet Union, was based
