264 | THE GULAG ARCHIPELAGO

armies arrived. They were arrested in their apartments and on
the street, just like Soviet citizens. For a while State Security
arrested only men, and not all of them, only those who had in
one or another way revealed a political bias. Later on, their
families were transported to exile in Russia, but some were left
where they were in Bulgaria and Czechoslovakia. In France they
were welcomed into Soviet citizenship with honors and flowers
and sent back to the Motherland in comfort; and only when they
got to the U.S.S.R. were they raked in. Things dragged out
longer for the Shanghai émigrés. In 1945 Russian hands didn‘t
reach that far. But a plenipotentiary from the Soviet government
went to Shanghai and announced a decree of the Presidium of
the Supreme Soviet extending forgiveness to all émigrés. Well,
now, how could one refuse to believe that? The government cer—
tainly couldn‘t lie! Whether or not there actually was such a
decree, it did not, in any case, tie the hands of the Organs. The
Shanghai Russians expressed their delight. They were told they
could take with them as many possessions as they wanted and
whatever they wanted. They went home with automobiles—the
country could put them to good use. They were told they could
settle wherever they wanted to in the Soviet Union and, of
course, work at any profession or trade. They were transported
from Shanghai in steamships. The fate of the passengers varied.
On some of the ships, for some reason, they were given no food
at all. They also suffered various fates after reaching the port of
Nakhodka (which was, incidentally, one of the main transit
centers of Gulag). Almost all of them were loaded into freight
cars, like prisoners, except that they had, as yet, no strict convoy,
and there were no police dogs. Some of them were actually de—
livered to inhabited places, to cities, and allowed to live there
for two or three years. Others were delivered in trainloads
straight to their camps and were dumped out somewhere off a
high embankment into the forest beyond the Volga, together
with their white pianos and their jardinieres. In 1948—1949, the
former Far Eastern émigrés who had until then managed to stay
out of camps were scraped up to the last man.

As a nine—year—old boy I had read the small dark—blue books
of V. V. Shulgin with more interest than I had read Jules Verne.
At that time they were sold openly in our book stalls. His was
