The Interrogation | 125

Ivanov—Razumnik found one hundred forty prisoners in a standard
Butyrki cell intended for twenty—five—with toilets so overbur—
dened that prisoners were taken to the toilet only once a day,
sometimes at night; and the same thing was true of their outdoor
walk as well." It was Ivanov—Razumnik who in the Lubyanka
reception "kennel" calculated that for weeks at a time there were
three persons for each square yard of floor space (just as an
experiment, try to fit three people into that space!).** In this "ken—
nel" there was neither ventilation nor a window, and the prison—
ers‘ body heat and breathing raised the temperature to 40 or 45
degrees Centigrade—104 to 113 degrees Fahrenheit—and every—
one sat there in undershorts with their winter clothing piled
beneath them. Their naked bodies were pressed against one an—
other, and they got eczema from one another‘s sweat. They sat
like that for weeks at a time, and were given neither fresh air nor
water—except for gruel and tea in the morning.*"

And if at the same time the latrine bucket replaced all other
types of toilet (or if, on the other hand, there was no latrine
bucket for use between trips to an outside toilet, as was the case
in several Siberian prisons); and if four people ate from one
bow!, sitting on each other‘s knees; and if someone was hauled
out for interrogation, and then someone else was pushed in
beaten up, sleepless, and broken; and if the appearance of such
broken men was more persuasive than any threats on the part of
the interrogators; and if, by then, death and any camp whatever
seemed easier to a prisoner who had been left unsummoned for
months than his tormented current situation—perhaps this really

23. That same year in the Butyrki, those newly arrested, who had already
been processed through the bath and the boxes, sat on the stairs for several days
at a stretch, waiting for departing prisoner transports to leave and release space
in the cells. T— v had been imprisoned in the Butyrki seven years earlier, in
1931, and says that it was overcrowded under the bunks and that prisoners lay
on the asphalt floor. I myself was imprisoned seven years later, in 1945, and
it was just the same. But recently I received from M. K. B——ch valuable
personal testimony about overcrowding in the Butyrki in 1918. In October of

that year—during the second month of the Red Terror—it was so full that they
even set up a cell for seventy women in the laundry. When, then, was the
Butyrki not crowded?

24. But this, too, is no miracle: in the Vladimir Internal Prison in 1948,
thirty people had to stand in a cell ten feet by ten feet in size! (S. Potapov.)

25. By and large there is a good deal in Ivanov—Razumnik‘s book that is
superficial and personal, and there are many exhaustingly monotonous jokes.

But the real life of the cells in the 1937—1938 period is very well described
there.

 
